---
title: "k1q-k1qmxhno3c-English"
source: "k1q-k1qmxhno3c-English.txt"
generated_by: normalize_captions.py
format: simplified transcript
---

# k1q-k1qmxhno3c-English

> This is a simplified Markdown transcript generated from cleaned captions.
> Timestamps were removed. Speaker attribution is not inferred unless added in a later review pass.

## Transcript

>> Good morning. Good morning, everyone. I'm trying your trick, isn't that it. Hi, everyone. If you could please take your seat. We're about to start. I know you all. I'll start calling by name Giza. Jacob, please take your seat guide. Thank you. Welcome again to the second day of OSPO for good conference. Today we're starting at 10. I hope you had the extra 30 minutes sleep was beneficial. We learned a lot yesterday. We had very stimulating discussions. We heard a lot aboutthe problems andchallenges andopportunities and strength of open source in the community. We had all these different panels where we learned about open source at the UN first. We learned about open source and artificial intelligence. We learned about open source in global south. Last, we learned about open source in government and heard about some of the issues and opportunities for open source within government. Today we have a different set of discussions. I hope you will enjoy them just as much as you enjoyed yesterday. Our first panel today will be about open source at work in the world. Here we have a steamed list of speakers. I'm very excited about that panel. After that, we're going to 11.30 when we finish that panel. We changed the program. Instead, we're going to have a round table. We hear from you a lot of colleagues. A lot of people here wanted something more interactive. I will be calling on few institutions to speak about to give their work in the open source world andshare with us some concrete examples of how they are leveraging open source. Then we will break for lunch. After that, we'll be coming for the afternoon with a very interesting panel about open source and youth. It's organized by our colleagues at UNICEF and UNICEF are going to moderate that. Right after, we're going to have two more panels. One about cities. There's a massive open source revolution happening within cities. There's a lot of ospos being created within the cities. We have here a super interesting six people panel, five speaker plus moderator panel. This is going to be a very interesting one, very diverse. The last panel of the day, we kept the best for last is Sacheco andwe're going to be aboutthe community how to engage the community and how we all of us could leverage the community. I hope you have an interesting day. Before that, I want to kick off with the lack yesterday. If we can have the word cloud, we'd love to have your impression. What is your expectation from today? At the end of the day yesterday, we heard from you what you learned, what was your takeaway. Now again, what do you expect to learn by the end of the day? They're on it in a second. We heard you, beer was important by the end of the day and coffee. Hopefully this time. Maybe we do it after. Maybe we do that at the end of the session. Nick will be introducing the first panel, please, Nick. Welcome back, everyone. Just as a reminder, if you need to use the restroom, you'll have to head up to the top and out there and coffee is outside as well. For our first session of the day we have a very exciting discussion lined up around open source at work in the world. I'm sure you're thinking, well, what does that mean? It can mean a lot of things. Yes, it can. But we really wanted to use this session to go back to basics and to talk about how open source is being used at scale across our entire societies and the entire globe as well asto talk aboutopportunities forusing open source innovation and working within open source communities globally. Your moderator for the panel will be Sophia Vargas, an open source researcher and analyst at Google, as well as an active member of the open source community around the chaos project. Before we welcome the Sophia to the stage and our panelists,we will hear some reflections fromour keynote speakers,Adriana Grohl and Andreas Rickert Loda,WHO both work in the German government to advance the use and sustainability of open source technologies at scale. Adriana is the co-founder of the Sovereign Tech Fund, which invests in the security and sustainability of public interest digital infrastructures and open source ecosystems in Germany and beyond. Andreas comes from the center for digital sovereignty. Sendis, as it goes by, is German acronym, a unique open source office which aims to advance the sovereignty and independence of the German government's digital infrastructure using open source technology and open communities. Adriana and Andreas are going to give us a very unique joint keynote showcasing the broader vision of the German government around open source and how they are increasingly seeking to link up the agendas of their two offices. Adriana and Andreas, welcome to the stage. Good morning, everyone. Oh, it is nice. We're honoured to give a keynote today,speaking about the roles of government in making open source work. For that, we want to give you an insight into what we do at the Sovereign Tech Fund and what we do at the Center for Digital Sovereignty, why we think that work is important andwhy we hope that more governments will pick up such or similar roles in the future. We believe thattogether we can holistically strengthen the open source ecosystem and achieve digital sovereignty. With digital sovereignty, we mean the self-determined use of digital technologies by governments, companies, and individuals alike. We can only achieve digital sovereignty with a strong and resilient open source ecosystem. And for strong and open source open source ecosystem,we need to invest back intoit and make use of it likewise. So Andreas,we'll give you an insight now in senders andI will follow up with the Sovereign Tech Fund. Thank you. So senders is a public owned company which we built in 2023. So we are rarely new. And at the moment, we are 20 employers there and we would like to go up into a triple for the next two years. We are the competency service center, the strange digital sovereignty forthe federal level,for the state level,and for the local government area. And asyou all know,digital sovereignty is a broad spectrum and it's defined differently. So our first task is to implement more open source into the German government. And therefore we are the German OSPO, we could say. And as Leslie was also announced from Markus Lichtel. And fromour side,it's very important to use more open source for more digital sovereignty at the German government. So senders supports a public administration in reducing critical dependencies of individual IT providers. So we offer experience services and that is much more important as I think. We also do concrete solutions as platforms, as products, and we promote digital sovereignty for the public sector. So you may ask how we do that. We bundle requirements fromthe public sector andcollaborate with the open source ecosystems open source partners. So some of them are already here, see a lot of them. And that's how we work. So we do not only do governance, we do more. We set up projects to enable to use the use of open source in Germany. And we'll go to two projects of us later on. The Southern Tech Fund was also established about two years ago. We are a co-creation actually between different people in government and from civil society. We are now about to become 15 people working on strengthening the open source ecosystem. We had a unique start. We were incubated in the federal agency for disruptive innovation in Germany. And we're now spinning out becoming an independent company also owned by the German government. Our core mission is to support the open source ecosystem. And we do that with a focus on digital infrastructure. We define digital infrastructure for us as the software that developers need to develop software. That gives us a really laser focus on the people in the open source ecosystem and the maintenance of existing code. And we really understand that the open source ecosystem is the foundation formany things that we want to achieve. Be it innovation, competition, but also transparency, participation, and democracy. For thatwork,we're building up different instruments as part of the Southern Tech Fund. Right now, we take a learning approach. We start with one iterate and then go to the next. And we do thatin conversation withthe wider ecosystem,especially Zendes in Germany to make sure that the work that we're doing, Andreas explained Zendes as the OSPO of the German government. I explain the Southern Tech Fund sometimes as the machine or the engine room that runs underneath it to make sure that approach is aligned and what we're doing supports Zendes mission and the impact in the end is really seeable for government and civil society and also companies. Now, in this room, we could probably skip that slide. But it's always good to start withwhy although everyone here cherishes the open source ecosystem and its communities. We heard a lot about the values we see enshrined in open source yesterday and that open source is a way of working together and I think that is very true. I just said it's a foundation, a critical foundation for many good things we want to achieve and the best way actually to achieve them. But I would actually like to add that there's another dimension andI think most of you also heard those sayings and know about those numbers. But once it was said software is eating the world and then it was added that open source software is eating software faster than software is eating the world. And I would now like to add that actually the success of open source software is eating open source software which basically means that we have this amazing ecosystem that we created largely bottom up with people WHO put their heart and soul into it all the time and we kind of take it for granted which is not the reality. It does not rain from the heavens like every commonly shared good. We cannot just use it. We also need to really take care of it. The numbers support that as well. Let me be precise here. There was one survey by the Harvard Business School saying that open source software is valued at 8.8 trillion. It's in 96% of code bases and in 99% of some commercial software consists of open source software. So just to add some numbers to it I think the values we all hold them up butfrankly we cannot afford we cannot pay for losing the open source ecosystem. And I think it's about time that we understand this as a reality and that why open source needs to work is that we actually have no alternative or we don't want to have an alternative but to make it work. It's the best thing that we came up with and it's the most successful strategy to achieving our goals and missions. So I think it's a good time that public sector, private sector and civil society sits down together and thinks about the roles that we want to fulfill in making open source work for us and also giving back to ensure that it's still around in the future thatit still provides this engine room for innovation and participation and democratic values. We will now deep dive a little bit into how Zendis is following up on this andthen I will also give insight into the sovereign tech fund. Back to Andreas. Thanks. So as I earlier already said, collaboration is one important thing. And if we're talking about open source software in the public sector,we need to talk about software distribution infrastructure as well. And if we want the government to procure open source software, we need to make procurement of open source solution as easy as possible. I think that's a very important topic forthe German government aseasy aspossible that everybody is able to use open source software. And if you want, and this is what we do with open code. So our platform is the first national wide platform to whichwe will federal level state level and local government offices andauthorities can search open source solutions use open source solution provides their own code, collaborate together and reuse the software. At the moment, we are currently have 4500 registered users at the platform. We have 1, 500 repositories. That's not as much as GitHub. I already know. But it's very important for the German government and for the employers WHO work with open source so that they trust an open source. So we create the infrastructure to promote the use and provision of sustainable open source solutions from the government, from the government. And you will find the knowledge catalog introduction aboutopen source at the public sector provided advisors about maintenance and licensing. So what is exactly open source? So nobody in this room is it? So we don't have to explain somebody here. What is open source? Well, how does it work? But there are a lot of people out there WHO don't know what is about open source. And that's what we are doing. So in the end, from my perspective, it's all about trust. The public administration has to trust an open source. And that's what we are doing at the moment with this platform to explain everything. And hopefully you can use a core code. We try to set everything in English so you can use and see a lot of the platform what we are doing at the moment. And on the next slide, you see one of our products, which is already on the platform open code. So OpenDesk is our take on the several workday solutions. Together with currently eight open source product vendors which are certainly cases market leaders in their field, we created a joint product with a solution for a task that we will have on every day based and regular collaborations and communications. So this is what everybody has to use every day. And you all can see what products are in there. And we can explain it maybe after that little deeper. So unlike other work space solutions, OpenDesk is a little bit flexible. So you can deploy OpenDesk in every infrastructure. You can deploy it in a submarine. You can deploy it on a hyperscaler. It's all Kubernetes based. And that's what we are doing. We want to have the choice in which infrastructure we deploy our work space. That's what we defined. And that's what we are doing there. And together with the open source vendors, we are providing security level. We provide us innovation. We try every day to have a look at what is the need of the public administration and rebuild what is the need and that's what we are doing there. And at the moment, OpenDesk is free to download on OpenCode. And we will launch the enterprise version in the end of the year and also a software service solution forthe German public administration so that everybody is able to use an alternative. I will not say the other vendors at the moment,but you all know what I mean aboutit. So And OpenDesk is not just the topic of interest in Germany. So yesterday you heard about that other countries already is cutting that topic. And at the moment, we are in touch with several European states and countries to roll out OpenDesk. And through all of it, so doing it was France to collaborate in the next steps for using OpenDesk. So I know it's right now again. Before explaining a little bit better what a sovereign tech fund is doing, I need to come back to our mission once again because I think it's a little harder to understand. And we have this great situation that if we are doing our job very well, nobody will notice because it's invisible. Only if we're not doing our job well and something doesn't work,then people will notice,which is not a situation one wants to be in but unfortunately it's a very important work that needs to be done. So as I said, we are now supporting the foundational technologies thatwe need to build,maintain and run other digital technologies. So software thatis very invisible formany people WHO are not themselves software developers and WHO works most of the time amazingly, but sometimes it breaks. And it breaks more often. The more people just take from it and use it and the fewer people give back and maintain it. So we have a situation where we really need to pick up this job that is right now mostly done by volunteers in the open source communities and sometimes supported by bigger foundations and by industry. But we see that there is a real role for government to understand thatin the 21st century,infrastructure includes software meaning open source software. And thatwe need to build organizations thatcan pick up that job in supporting the digital foundations that we all rely on. So we are doing a couple of things by now, but we started very focused andsmall because what we are doing is pretty new by defining the maintenance of existing open source software as a public service using public money to commission work in those software projects. For that we set up the sovereign tech fund, which operates with about17 million euro by the federal ministry of economic affairs in Germany investing that in technologies that the team at the sovereign tech fund scouts, identifies and then commissions work in,in an exchange withmaintainers WHO have of course a very high level of expertise. And also we have an application platform because not everything we can find, we can scout, we see, we also want to be approachable. That is what we started with. Now unfortunately, money doesn't fix all problems. It would be great if that would be the case, but oftentimes the real issues are structural in nature andyou need to think aboutmany different like a portfolio of instruments to tackle those challenges. So besides investing in about 45 different technologies, since we started, we are now thinking about other instruments that we are building up. Those include a fellowship to provide a situation in which different maintainers find themselves in a better position to do work thatis very necessary andvery critical for all of us, but never gets the kind of resources and time that it needs. We also understand thatstandards in open source software development go hand in hand andif you only do one or the other, you might not achieve the impact that you desire. So we also think about how the summer tech fund could pick up a role in this area. We also see that diversity and generally the lack of people WHO do maintenance work in open source software is a huge issue that will especially play out mid and long term. So even again,if we had unlimited amount of money,resources we don't have the amount of people WHO are capable and willing to do the work. So we need to think about how can we bring in new talent here? How can we inspire people WHO have fun, of course, doing innovation, being part of hackathons, then to also pick up maintaining the code that they need to work with to innovate. So that is a big focus that we have right now. We have already a bug resilience program running whichis not just a bug bounty but also a bug fixing program and I think even better, you know, prevention is always better than cure. We also want to train open source communities in not coming into a situation where they know they have a list of bugs butthey simply don't have the time at hand to fix them which is not a situation anyone wants to be in. So as you can see, we're going step by step in building a new kind of public institution that identified a few pain points I'd like to say in the open source ecosystem andthen designing programs together withthe communities and stakeholders in trying to tackling them sustainably so that in the future we still have this amazing resource at hand but we fixed maybe some structural issues that come from a long history of how we're working together and that we identified so we can work on this. I think we can already go now to our last slide whichis answering what the topic of our keynote is what's the role for governments? So I think it's pretty clear that we benefit massively from the open source ecosystem andthat we cannot outsource as governments maintaining this ecosystem just to volunteer communities and to the private sector. We need government in this mix as well and then everyone needs to talk to each other and make sure that the roles that we pick up are complementary so that in the end the whole ecosystem gets stronger in this sense of the tight lifts or boats because we all rely on it. Before we build these organizations I think it's very important that we really take the time to understand the production logics of the open source ecosystem,how communities operate and what these briefly mentioned structural challenges are becauseonly if we take thattime if we really have a conversation with maintainers, with the communities, also with private interests, as a government we can build this new organization like senders like the sovereign tech fund pick up this new kind of public service of understanding infrastructure in the 21st century including software, not just roads and bridges, and then have meaningful instruments in place. But I think the step is very crucial becauseit's not as Andreas said we all know why open source is great, other people don't. We know why we believe that governments should play a role in this ecosystem, others don't. So I think this work needs to happen first in order to have meaningful instruments and then we might have really reached a different level in which we have this resource at hand in the future as well, we don't lose it, we can drive innovation,economic growth,we can secure democratic values we have participation from many different stakeholders andwe can,yeah,make government make open source work for good in the world. Thank you. Thank you so much to our speakers for the amazing keynote. Good morning everyone. I'm going to do something a little bit different and I'm going to have my panelists introduce themselves. I'm excited to hear today to talk about open source at work in the world and I really want to kind of rephrase that to open source work itself. As a researcher in open source, I'm fascinated by the variety and organic nature in which people from a variety of backgrounds come together to co-create software and co-create projects, even though they might become fromdifferent places,different incentives,different motivations. Why do they do this? Why do they continue to create and be productive in these spaces? So I'm really excited to be joined today by a number of panelists with incredible experience in this space. Without ado, I'm going to go join them on stage. Okay, because I didn't introduce anyone, I'm going to have to introduce themselves. We'll start on the right here. Can you briefly describe your role, your background in open source and what organizations you represent today? Oh, press the button. There we go. Looks a little bit different. Good morning everyone. I am Dimitris Chidom. I'm currently the chief of staff to the CEO at GitHub. I see many of my friends in the audience today, so you may be familiar with me in my former role at GitHub where I led diversity, inclusion and belonging. And before that, I was at Red Hat leading diversity and inclusion, so I have a pretty long history in open source. Hi, I'm Mike Milinkovich. I'm the executive director of the Eclipse Foundation. I'm in the open source community now for 20 years. My developer days are behind me, but so running the Eclipse Foundation and Eclipse community is my experience in open source. And it's been a really fun ride for the last 20 years. Hi, my name is Anir Chodri. I'm the policy advisor of the A2I program in Bangladesh, Bangladesh government, which started at the prime minister's office. Now it's part of the ICT ministry and cabinet office basically leading digital transformation within government and open source is actually an integral part of it. About 20 years ago I started the first open source organization a nonprofit in Bangladesh called Bangladesh Innovation through open source or BIOS. Recently open source has been seen within the government as an enabler to not only sustainable software,secure software formeeting development goals but also as a driver of innovation. And the movement within the government in the last few years on digital public infrastructure or DPI has really been enabled by open source. We're now exploring the possibility of a new DOS,not the proprietary DOS thatwe are familiar with but the new DOS development operating system. So the components that will allow us to build new innovations for public good. Thank you. My name is David Nally. I'm the president of the Apache Software Foundation. The ASF's been around for about 25 years now. We're celebrating our 25th year acting as a steward for open source software. I'm a relative newcomer to the ASF. I've only been around for a dozen years. There are a number of folks here in this audience WHO've been participating at Apache much longer than I have. But I have the pleasure of serving as the president at the moment. And the ASF acts as that steward for roughly 320 different software products, several hundred open source projects. And we take that responsibility seriously, because while we've been around for25 years and we have honed in on one possible way to develop open source. And we've been able to draw nearly 750, 000 contributors over that 25 years. We also recognize that software has a lifecycle. And sometimes you need to signal that not only is software available, but maybe it's unsupported. And so we take that role as a steward very seriously. And I talked a moment ago about how many products and how many projects. But we've also retired andessentially advertised to the public that89 projects that used to be Apache projects can no longer be trusted. And Apache projects range from the foundational building blocks like Apache Commons or Apache logging to things that have transformed the industry like Spark, Hadoop, Tomcat, iceberg and airflow. This has been an interesting journey for us going fromthe original namesake,the Apache web server to today where we have several hundred folks and are recognized not just for the software that we produced, but our processes around IP hygiene, security and in fact our license, which is one of the most commonly adopted licenses. Thank you so much. Thank you everyone for introducing yourself. I want to start with a pretty informal question, which is what brought you to open source individually. And if you have been a maintainer of an open source project, why were you doing it? I'm going to start with you, Mike. So I did not start as a maintainer of an open source project. I was recruited as the executive director of the eclipse foundation. But then the question becomes, why did I want the job? And yeah, there are days. Mama told me days like that. But so 2004 was a very, very different world andopen source was a much newer thing in 2004 than it is today and certainly not nearly as mainstream. But fundamentally I was fascinated by the idea that communities could come together anddevelop software productively together and many times without ever meeting each other entirely over the internet and doing amazing things without the hierarchical control that we're familiar with in our daily corporate lives. So this idea of building communities, building sustainable communities thatare working productively together for the betterment of our societies and economies was something that was why I wanted the job. And I can say that after 20 years of doing it, it remains endlessly fascinating. There's never a dull moment. Thanks for that. What about you, Demetrius? Sure. So mine is definitely a lot more personal. I grew up. My mom was a single mom with three kids in college and I was the youngest and she was making 13, 000 hours a year when I graduated from high school. And I luckily found a magazine thatsays one of the top salaries was forpeople that had a computer science or computer engineering degree. And that's how I, you know, magically pick my major. And that was transforming for me. And so I was always just inspired by trying to get as many people into tech as I possibly could. And then when I learned about open source, I personally assert thatopen source is the lowest barrier to entry forpeople WHO want to participate in software development and computer science or just technology. And so I actually was inspired by open source and to get involved and to try to get as many people especially from underrepresented andmarginalized communities intotech so they can have some of those life changing transformations that I personally did. Thank you so much for sharing that. What about you and here? Well, since my software development days almost 30 years ago, I spent about 13 years in the U. S. building companies, startups, the East Coast. And a lot of them are actually using open source software. So I'm actually building open source software. So whenI returned to my home country Bangladesh about17 years ago and started this journey of digital transformation fromthe government side I wanted to slowly develop policies are open source adoption andthen finally building open source from within the government ecosystem. So it's a journey that spans almost three decades, personally starting with open source consumption creation and then taking that into the policy realm of doing it at a national scale. In the last three years Bangladesh has also been the secretary of a network called South South Network for public service innovation, SSN for PSI, which is now about 40 plus countries of the global south now exploring the concepts of digital public infrastructure and also in a hidden manner, open source. Open source is not as easy to think from within government and also not as easy to think even from the private sector. But we're trying to find ways to promote it developing or rather promoting the right type of business models as well. So in different ways, I've been trying to do my part to promote open source. Thank you and David last. So I started I had long been a user of open source software and I started contributing to open source to solve problems that I would have with a specific piece of code. And that was a project called postal, which was an SMTP testing tool. And I do not live and have never lived in one of the tech hubs in the United States. And so seeing that I could go fix a problem anddidn't need to ask permission and didn't need to live in San Francisco or New York City,I realized thatopen source opened up a lot of interesting problems. And so I began to contribute to other projects and eventually became employed to work on those open source projects. And the the stunning thing for me as an individual was the opportunity to tackle hard problems and then share the results that I had come to with other people so that they could also solve their problems. And that ability to not just solve my own problems,but solve other people's problems and work on fascinating problems was the draw into open source for me. Great. And I'm really appreciating all these personal stories because I think I really wanted to highlight here is the diversity and motivation we heard about the interest and fascination, the interest in solving problems, the interest to educate and learn new skills and a place to learn to create, to build, to build new solutions. For me personally, it was a lot about learning. As a researcher, I was excited about the fact that I could just go join a community and learn more about open source and participate in it directly and learn from experience. But then I ended up staying because I had a lot of fun. It was an incredible space to meet people that are solving similar problems, interested in similar problems. And when we look at the research, it tends to collaborate with that. People are often brought to open source for educational purposes, but then stay for other reasons, whether or not that's fun or altruism. And I wanted to bring that up becausewe've been hearing frommany organizations aboutwhy they as an organization want to pursue open source solutions either within government or within broader organizations. But the people themselves thatchoose to participate are there for a variety of reasons? And whether or not they stay, they or may not be related to that. And so in terms of people getting brought to open source, I'm also curious about why they stay. And here on stage with me, we have people representing a number of different organizations that are designed to create collaboration spaces for open source software development. And I'm curious from each of them, which aspects of their platform,their organization are best designed to encourage sustained participation not just bringing people to a cause,but keeping them there,keeping them engaged keeping them productive and collaborative. And so I'm curious what those aspects are, whether or not they're incentives or nudges. I'm going to start with Mike again in terms of what you've seen in your space. That's a big and complicated question. But let me start off by saying that one of my takeaways from yesterday, there's lots of interest in talking about how open source can help governments achieve various sustainability goals. But, and Adriana really talked well about this, is like, we have a sustainability problem in open source. And it's really important to recognize that we are constantly demanding more from open source developers and open source communities. You know, security being one of the big topics these days with things like the Cyber Resilience Act,we're constantly demanding more and more of the developers WHO work in these communities and on these projects. And that's unsustainable, given the current set of economic nudges that are out there. And that's personally one of the reasons why I'm soexcited about the Sovereign Tech Fund is they're actually doing something tangible to help. In terms of, you know, the kinds of things that we do at the CUPS Foundation, I'll just sort of echo some of the things that David talked about. And one of the things to recognize is that, all technology have a life cycle. And putting something in a patch that they call it,putting it in the attic,it's what we call it putting it in the archive. But,you know,the fact that a project comes to an end of the life is not a sign of failure it's just the way life goes. And so having processes where you can identify projects and really manage them through a life cycle is definitely part of the solution. It's not the solution, but it's definitely part of the solution. And recognizing that projects are exciting when they start. They're exciting when they get broadly adopted and used. But everything eventually becomes legacy. And at some point you have to recognize that. And then you're into a very different kettle of fish because you don't, it's not exciting. So attracting new developers becomes more difficult. And the incentives for the people that are maintaining the code become -- it's less -- it's more difficult to do that with purely intangible incentives. If you're tirelessly maintaining a 20-year-old code base, I really hope that the economy and society is using in a large way, you're probably looking for some kind of paycheck to do that. And that's not all universally true, but that's definitely one of the things to keep in mind is thatwe talk aboutinfrastructure and we talk about sustainability. But I don't think we spend enough time really thinking about what that means astechnology truly matures andbecomes thatlegacy infrastructure that everybody is using and everybody needs, but it's just not exciting anymore. And yeah, with that I'll hand the baton over. >> Can I jump in, Mike? So there is a theory of communities of practice. And Mike will talk aboutthe Eclipse community andI will talk about the Apache community. And the reality is thatwhile there might be an Apache community there's really a couple hundred communities that are oriented around a problem. And so I don't think of this as so much community of practice as community of problem. And that community forms around solving a particular problem and working to solve that. And as long as that problem exists, hopefully a community will continue to exist to solve it. We do have the problem that a lot of this is assumed to be solved. And people take it for granted. I think Ben yesterday talked aboutdisruptive technology becoming mainstream and then becoming infrastructure. If you assume thatunderlying libraries like Boost or Apache Commons just exist and you can take it forgranted,that's going to be problematic when you need to build a resilient infrastructure because someone needs to be taking care and maintaining that over the long term becausethose are not going away,we're going to continue to need that software. It continues to solve a very active problem today. But because it's not exciting, because we've got 20 years history, we end up in a place where people take that for granted. And I think doubly so for governments where they understand they have to maintain the electrical grid,they have to maintain highways they have to maintain rail infrastructure. Same is true for software. And I think by and large, most of the governments are looking and seeing open source as a digital public good and they like that. But they're also not recognizing that there is some ongoing maintenance and that maintenance will have to be paid by all of the members of the community,not just the government and not just the folks WHO are contributing as volunteers. I'm going to direct it to our policy advisor here for coming on that. So now I'm just going to jump into it. Thank you for preempting that. So I think open source has been particularly successful as infrastructure. So if you look at the web platforms, if you look at the programming languages, I think it's been just incredibly successful. But I really like the way David has focused on problem solving. So essentially we need building blocks to solve problems. Let me give you one problem that we may all be familiar with. The problem of monitoring pregnancies, high risk pregnancies in every country. So what happens in Bangladesh is that we have about 70, 000 community health workers within the government andin almost an equal number within the NGOs particularly one large NGO called BRAC, which is apparently the largest NGO in the world. So these 140, 50, 000 health workers go from door to door for antenatal visits. But they don't know which the high risk pregnancies are. So it's an averaging of the effect. So they go to all doors without knowing maybe there are 10% high risk pregnancies. So now that's a problem. Let's say we give that problem to the open source community. What will the community do? Will they actually come up witha few components of wearable computing which is a combination of hardware and software in a frugal manner to have the pregnant women wear that and provide data? Will they actually come up with the infrastructure that's necessary to do the analytics forthe health decision makers and also the feed level workers? Will they actually come up with the way to identify using AI perhaps, finding patterns of high risk pregnancies? And will they actually come up withdashboards thatwill maybe modify the schedule services right? So to solve this problem, we won't get too much from the open source community. Today we will get the programming languages, maybe Python and PHP and so on and so forth. We may get the infrastructure support, but can we think of a developing operating system which goes beyond the likes of maybe DHIS 2 in health which does only routine information right? So if we can take some social problems, development problems and build open source communities around them and not expect, I could really agree with David that they will be volunteers,that they'll get paid in some manner they will actually take the pride in solving social and economic problems, not just technical problems, but also there is career path, there is recognition, there is compensation. So I think we need to think about open source business models in a fundamentally different manner right now connected to the SDG since we are sitting at the UN connected to solving the development problems of every nation. And that's when open source community could actually elevate itself to the next level of solving problems, real problems of the world. Thank you. Thank you for that. I want to kind of reorient this a bit to call on Demetris. I know you might need to leave soon fora flight,so we're going to make sure we use you while you're here. We talked a lot about the maintainers and the people that are required to continue the sustainability of these projects. But there's also the question of how do we encourage more people to participate? And I really love your story about how you saw this as a low barrier to entry into the technology industry. And I want to call out one of the programs that you've helped to build all in which is really focused on encouraging open source participation from a variety of backgrounds and creating inclusive spaces. And I'm curious in terms of encouraging the next generation of contributors and maintainers, what were the most important tenets foryou or how that you see in terms of creating inclusive and welcoming spaces to people that might not have the background of paper that would be a fit for these sorts of things. Sure. As Sophia mentioned, I created a program while a GitHub call all in. And it was founded to encourage the next generation of people that may have not even had exposure to open source to get open source skills and opportunity to join an organization to actually start their career. And one of the things that we immediately saw was that we focused really on students at the beginning. And we realized that not all computer science curriculums or technical curriculums at university were created equal. And people had varying degrees of technical skills. And so what we saw was most important that open source communities could do was give everybody an opportunity to meaningfully contribute. I know there's an age-old debate in open source on whether or not an open source contributor is a coder or a non coder. And we just talked about that Mike, right? Where, you know, there's so many aspects beyond coding that you can actually encourage people WHO may not have the coding skills just yet to meaningfully contribute whether it's managing your budget, whether it is, you know, advocacy work, whether it is, you know, supporting documentation, all of those things while they get their skills up and while you mentor them. So that was one of the main things that they mentioned that they needed to just have some meaningful ways to contribute andrecognition for doing so. The second thing that we saw was just making sure that people -- well, that projects had really clear documentation on how to meaningfully contribute. And then what we found, interestingly enough,we did a 2021 survey on open source diversity,equity,and inclusion is that most people said thatthey didn't feel welcome in communities because of lack of responsiveness. Literally when they would reach out and no one would respond, that was why they didn't feel welcome. And so once we started talking to maintainers, it wasn't because they didn't want people to feel welcome. Maintainers were just juggling a lot of other things. And so we have to make sure going back to thatprevious question thatwhen we're talking aboutsustainability that we also look at things like health well-being,maintain a burnout even beyond the funding because all of us know thatyou can get paid a whole lot of money but if you're burnout you will walk away from it. And so there's so many different aspects of it. And so we just need to make sure we're looking at it in a holistic way. Thank you so much for that. Speaking of burnout, we've been talking a lot about the promise of what open source can do for us, for the world, for our individual communities. But not everything goes well. It's not all sunshine and roses. So I'm curious if any of you have any particular examples of pitfalls to avoid or areas of caution. If you're seeking to create a collaboration or collaborative space,what can go wrong and how do we try to mitigate that? Anyone? I mean, you're looking my direction, so I assume that means you want me to talk. I don't know if you're going to like my answer. So I talked earlier about community of practice and community of problems. And so I think the thing that you want to ensure that you have is a common purpose, maybe even a common vision. I think it's perfectly okay to have differences of opinion about technical implementation and maybe even style. Dare I say even opinions about VI versus EMACs? Tabs versus spaces. Tabs versus spaces is another one. But your community of problem needs to have a common purpose thatthey're trying to solve so that everyone is pulling in the same direction. And if you don't have that, I think you're setting yourself up for a lot of disruption. If there's not a shared vision or a shared problem statement thatpeople can collaborate around,you know,I think that there's plenty of people WHO can write software. There's plenty of people WHO can collaborate and we've got great tools like GitHub, GitLab and others that facilitate that collaboration. But at the end of the day, the hard thing is the people problem. And those people need to be unified,at least in the direction of a problem hopefully in a vision of the solution to the problem. And so without that, I think there are a lot of pitfalls that beset you. And I'll just add a little bit more because,first of all,I agree with everything David said. But let's not forget that it actually helps to write down the rules and make sure that those rules are known. So things like community codes of conduct, things like contributing guides,and even things like channel guidelines all of these little bits of documentation in terms of what the expectations are really help. And one of the things we do, and it's kind of like every community has its own history,but generally speaking we've had a sort of a culture of keeping the discourse even on our mailing lists at a sort of a professional level. And I know that's not true of all communities, but it is mostly true of ours, and it's been a blessing. And so that's one of the things, but setting up that cultural expectation changes as you get new projects, and you have to kind of reset them. And doing that, the best way to do that is make sure that the rules are clear, and that the rules are known, and the rules are enforced. I remember, bazillion years ago, I was a hockey coach, and I read it for almost 20 years. And one of the first things I've ever got taught as a hockey coach is,you've got a bunch of boys,the first thing they want to know is what are the rules, and are you going to enforce them? And it turns out that coaching developers is actually not that different. I appreciate that. You actually kind of answered my next question, which I was just going to mention that it's natural for people to disagree. We've had a couple examples, just a little bit there. And I think there are a lot of tools that can be effective at resolving that conflict thing. I think you just mentioned a lot of them, having actual rules of procedure or code of conduct, ways that we will interact with each other and agree to disagree, and we have a process forward. I think it's really important to have ways to handle conflict, to be able to resolve issues as they come up, or be able to address them as needed. I also want to talk a little bit about what something David brought up earlier, and I think a couple of you have mentioned since then, is that not every project is going to be around forever. We have a lot of incredible ideas and visions of what people intend to build andwhat people have already been building in this room thatwe've heard of for the last day or so. But not everything works out. And sometimes there's a moment where you have to step back and acknowledge, do we need to adapt? Do we need to evolve? Do we need to let this end naturally because this project has reached end of life? It is no longer relevant. And I'm curious what you would recommend for this group here. How do you know when you need to do that? And then if you do, what are some examples of effective either sunsetting or adaptation that allowed for the community to continue to evolve? So I will jump in. At the Apache Software Foundation, I'm not saying that this is the only way, but we have a number of guidelines. The first is that you need to have enough community participants WHOare already involved in the project WHO can perform a release. If you cannot release software, you are no longer viable. We also have a number of other things that we're looking at like, are you able to respond to security issues? Because again, if you're not able to respond to a security issue, then we as an open source steward cannot responsibly tell the public that they should continue to consume your product, your software. And so we have a number of those things that we're looking for. I would say the two big ones are, can you still perform releases? And that can't be just a single person. That needs to be a community around it. At Apache, we would not allow a single maintainer project becausewe believe that it is not fulfilling our responsibilities as steward to permit that kind of single point of failure. And so we're actively looking for multiple people that are engaged in the project, can perform releases, can handle security issues and things of that nature. And then -- so did oh, again, but carried on a little bit farther. But then you need to have the ceremony, right? And so one of the things,you know,this community of practice idea is to a certain degree it's built up around the notion of you celebrate some ceremonies. So when a project is, you know, proposed or created, exits incubation, there's this life cycle and you have a little bit of a ceremony andthey've,you know,but you need to have a funeral,too for the projects when they come to an end. And a public disclosure that this project is no longer viable and it's come to the end of its life. So in addition to, like everything David said, don't forget about actually having the ceremony. >> Yeah. So someone needs to close up shop when it's over. And, you know, not speaking for Mike, but I think that's one of the key roles that foundations play, is to tell the world whether they can continue to trust a given project or not. >> I think on understanding what projects we can trust is also an important part of evaluation. And I'm curious, from your perspective, and asyou're guiding andadvising your government on what to use andhow what are the things you're looking at to ensure thatyou are actually picking something that is continuing to be a viable solution for them? >> I think from a government procurement standpoint, we need to reform what we have today, at least in Bangladesh and possibly in many other countries that I'm familiar with. The way software companies are suppliers often bid for projects is time and material spaces. So when you're actually using open source versus not open source, when you're actually building code that you open source yourself, they need to think differently. So when you open source, when a supplier, open source is its product, building differently about competition. So what if this code is completely open,the ones thatthey're producing completely open to other competitors? So what happens in the next time, David? Within the government, you don't really retire anything. So the concept within government is you don't ever solve a problem fully because you cannot. These are very complicated social, economic development problems. So you solve it as much as you can,and then you bring in the second iteration,the third iteration and so on and so forth. And in today's government software, we are actually seeing a lot of silos that need to be bridged. So health will produce its own thing, education will produce its own thing,but then you're seeing thatyou're actually working with the same set of population data. And you have all these silo databases thatyou need to bridge to come up with integrated policy making that is less costly for the country. So when you do that, there are many iterations that happen. So essentially you need to come up with cross agency procurement policies, which often don't exist. So there's the policy of procuring open source and procuring in a way thatwhatever you build will be open sourced,will be open,which means that you change business models. And then also do integrated procurement. So essentially what we're looking at is a problem that has not been solved within government, most governments. The German presentation that we saw that is actually creating an OSPO is probably a first step towards educating the policymakers about how to deal with open source in a manner that is sustainable, in a manner thatis cost effective,in a manner that is actually beneficial to creating common good. That goes across multiple ministries. Thank you. I'm going to move to the next question, and I'm going to direct it at you Demetris. We've been talking a lot abouthow open source itself can be an effective tool and maybe you can start using it forfree,but we all know andwe've talked aboutit here maintaining it requires a lot of time, energy, money just to sustain it over time. And we've also been talking a lot aboutcivic engagement andhow governments can participate and how they can engage. But I'm curious from your experience, what are the most effective ways for consumers of open source,whether or not they're individuals or governments or institutions to support and sustain the individual and the individual. I mean, you can think about open source projects as well,but I'm curious abouthow we sustain open source contributors and maintainers and support them. Yeah,I think one of the ways is fororganizations,whether government,civic,you know corporations to allow the opportunities for those that want to participate in open source, the space to do so. One of the things that we heard a lot from all of our maintainers in our focus groups was thatthey would have some amazing contributors to their projects they would upskill them,and then all of a sudden a company would see them,you know,very viable andcome in and recruit them. And you're now draining these communities of that, you know, that talent, and then they would just leave them. And so they felt that they were contributing a lot to developing talent for these companies. And then the companies wouldn't allow the people the space to participate in the projects once they were gainfully employed. So they want to celebrate that. But companies or, you know, organizations, they have to realize that if you're taking something froma community you should be replacing it or giving it back and sothat you don't leave those communities in the large because I would hate to see you know, some, you know, community that gets on the, you know, the ban list for Apache Foundation becausethey all of a sudden lost some key talent asa result of someone you know, poaching them, right? But, you know, we want to celebrate them and give them meaningful career opportunities. But I think that we all, it's incumbent upon all of us to make sure that anything thatwe're taking fromthe community that we're replacing it exponentially. Oh, that would be great. We're not seeing a lot of that in practice. I'm working on it. I think one of the challenges is that we expect almost quid pro quo. And the reality is that every consumer of open source, whether you're a government, an individual, or a private sector company,they benefit far more than they could ever contribute back because open sources become foundational to everything we do in software. And software, as Adriana mentioned earlier, is eating the world. And so, you know, there's no way we will be able to compensate the open source community writ large equal to the benefit that we gain from it. But we must protect against it becoming a tragedy of the commons. Thank you all to the panelists. I think by the schedule, I would like to open it up for questions, comments, earlier to have a little bit more space for this. I believe we have about 30 minutes or 25 minutes left. So, I see already a hand up in the back. So, let's go for it. >> Thank you so much. >> Oh, Kyoto. Adam Hyde from Koko. Very happy to be here. Thanks to Kat Alman for inviting me. So, open source in the area of the model of production that scale seems to be proven out very well in the, you know, the itch to scratch model. We have developers that have a problem and they are enabled to solve it because they have the means to solve it. So, when it comes to technical problems, it can scale very well. But you're also talking about solving social problems with it. And that seems to suggest thatyou have folks with the capacity to solve problems to create software. But they're not necessarily the people that have the problem that's being solved. So, there's a gap. So, I'm just wondering about that means of production. How does that scale? What are the stakeholders involved in that? I think it's a problem that's more common in the platform space wherethe end user is a consumer WHO is not anywhere near the production of the technology. So, I'm just wondering what your thoughts are around that. The politics of stakeholder's problems, that kind of thing. How do you get it to scale? Let me just try to repeat that the question to make sure I understand it. So, the scratch and itch model of production works really well for purely technical problems. But as we try to expand the remit of open source to include to tackle social issues you know it's the feedback loop. And so, one of the part of my answer is maybe open source can't solve all the world's problems. And maybe that's a place where it does fall down. But I think that's one possible answer. Another possible answer is if it's not just scratch your own itch froma technical perspective I think there needs to be money injected into the cycle in order to incent people to work on those kinds of problems. The idea that, you know,the intersection of people thatknow enough about the social problem to solve them and know enough about technology to build the software to solve them, that's a very, very small group of people on a global scale. And I think to get technical people to solve the problem is you're going to have to communicate what the requirements are what the problem is you're trying to solve and you're probably going to have to pay them both to build it and to maintain it. The idea of free production, just based on, you know, intrinsic personal motivations, I think breaks down in certain cases. And I think that's an example where it probably,it probably you can't just assume it's going to work without putting some real economic incentives into the mix. David just made a comment thatthe governments cannot hope to contribute as much to open-source production as the software developers. Maybe if you could look at it from a different perspective of focusing on the problems,social problems,and include developing practitioners government officers, policy makers into the open-source mix. They may not be able to write code, but they may be able to actually come up witha very accurate and possibly evolving the definition of the problem. So they're already paid by somebody, right? Nations and corporations. So if they feel thatthey're part of the problem definition and they're providing specification to solve,to be solved by the software developers then I think that's a much larger community of open-source. And the community of problems can actually bring those people in. I want to highlight, you know, Demetrius was talking about this earlier, that it's not just code, and that there is much more to open-source than writing a line of code and shipping a release of software. Some of it comes down to, can we even talk about the problem space? And I do think we have to think about open-source as larger than just software. I said I wasn't going to agree with Mike on everything. But I think that there is very much a problem space where open-source is not the perfect solution. And, you know, while I am, in most audiences, I would say I'm the most pro-open-source person in the room. I'm not sure that that's true here. But, you know, I don't know that open-source can or should tackle every problem that the world has to offer. It is a methodology. It's one that's worked well for a number of technological problems. I don't know that we can solve all of them. >> If I may just come in for a few seconds. I think if we -- I mean, yesterday, Lucy, I think it was WHO mentioned that instead of open-source -- not instead, but maybe if we could open the embedded open-source intodigital public goods then I think the scope becomes much larger. And that's where the DPJ Alliance, the GovStacks of the world actually are working. So that's a possibility that we can explore. Thank you. >> All right. I see a number of hands. I have no idea how to call on things in order. So what happens? >> I see Dwayne right in the middle. >> I'm waiting for it to turn around. There we are. Thank you. And thank you for the panel. Bone Demetris has left. I really wanted her perspective on this one in particular. But we talk a lot in this space about companies doing the right thing, or getting involved in open-source or getting back to open-source. Companies can't do the right thing. They're not people. All of us WHO run open-source program offices or have, we know that when we leave thatrole andtake a role in another organization the open-source program changes. We bring our own perspectives. The program that I run is not the program Remy runs or that Gil runs or that Sophia would run. So how can we get the open-source culture that we want more deeply embedded in these organizations soit survives when we all have to shuffle chairs every couple of years? >> Thank you. I saw Karen's hand go up early. So I'm going to call on Karen. >> The thing I wanted to say does actually sort of address that question,which I was going to say that I think we can't underestimate the importance of governance in all and foundations in this role in this work. I'm sorry. I should introduce myself. I'm Karen Sandler. I'm the executive director of the software freedom conservancy. We run a bunch of different programs,including outreach-y which is a paid internship program for folks subject to systemic bias. I would say that the governance component is often missing in our space. We're keen to send money to maintainers but not necessarily take the time to really evaluate how is that community run, how are decisions run. David was talking about this in the context of the advocacy software foundation not accepting single developer projects. It's the same at many of the organizations that are in physical sponsorship roles like software freedom conservancy like we do or like NEM focus. These fiscal sponsors that take this governance role play a really important component and I think are often overlooked. I would say thatthis kind of governance conversation actually plays into-- comes intoplay more often than you would think with our outreach-y project, for example, having that kind of overarching review over projects andcommunities that join outreach-y really has a greater impact than just the specific internships. A high percentage of our participants say that they would never have started an open source if they did not have a program inviting people like them to participate andthat they otherwise wouldn't give it a try but every community that participates in outreach-y does things like creating small tasks for people to work on designating times whenmentors are available to talk to people creating standards for conduct and, you know, having some procedures to deal with toxic individuals and I think that that kind of governance and review is something that should -- we really need to spend a lot more time on andit's something thatthe companies and governmental institutions and everybody else WHO's participating in an institutional way needs to recognize and support. Thank you for the great advertisement for the value of foundations and -- but to Duane's question, so we struggle with that all the time. I mean, like foundations live and die on their fiscal sponsors andwhen people change,you can,you know,big thing big impacts can happen and as far as -- and I totally agree that, you know, corporations can't do the right thing butwhat corporations can sometimes be trained to do is follow a process. So one of the things I think maybe to think about on the OSPO side of things is get your organization to adopt processes thatare written down thatwill survive your departure and moving along to a different thing. Nobody likes to write down processes but sometimes that's the best legacy you can leave behind when you move on especially in the context of an OSPO because if that's the formally adopted process forthe corporation sometimes they'll just keep doing it because that's what's written down. But fundamentally, I mean, you know, people are messy and they're great but everything that we -- you know, to a large degree, we talk about the open source ecosystem, the open source community, like how much of the stuff that we do is based on the personal relationships we all have. And there's -- I don't think there's any kind of walk of life where that isn't true. And so we can either -- we can try to formalize it as much as we can which is basically what I'm encouraging to do but I don't think we ever really want to take the personal relationships out of the mix either. >> Strongly support that. I'm going to call right here. I don't know what your name is. Please introduce yourself. >> I actually have a question so I don't know if I should ask that now. Thank you. Hi, I am Q. I'm the leader of P5.js, an open source art and education tool for learning to code with a strong focus on accessibility supported by the processing foundation. P5 is created and led by women and queer people of color. The lack of diversity in the open source is profound. According to the open source survey in 2017, less than 5% of open source development work worldwide is led by queer trends, by park women and fans with even fewer in the global south, like in China where I'm from. P5 has received funding from someone fromGoogle to support global contributors witha strong focus on paying for women and queer people of color WHO normally have less privilege to contribute. So my question to the panelists is how can governments and organizations better support open source leaders,maintainers and contributors. Thank you. >> So if I can be vocally self-critical, I will tell you thatmost open source organizations,including Apache are not great at it. We're not great at encouraging diverse voices or empowering people to participate unless they're already in a very privileged position. I think some programs like outreach that Karen Sandler mentioned a moment ago are interesting steps that are helping to perhaps add some diversity and add opportunity forpeople to contribute but I think it needs to be a measured response and your specific question was abouthow governments can do that and I would say they should be looking at the people WHO have gone before them like the Software Freedom Conservancy and the outreach program and Google has also run summer of code to help provide additional incentive to folks WHO might otherwise not have the privilege of spending their time working on open source software. And so I think they should certainly be looking at that as opportunities to learn and figure out how to invest. I'll tell you that from a purely open source perspective, I don't think we've done a great job on our own. >> In the morning keynote presentation I think Adriana andAndreas actually talked about the last slide was there were six things if you remember. And I'm just looking at some of them standardization, digital commons, education and training and core development. I think some of these things, if the right or SPO can be created, can actually be driven, some of these can be driven by that. The government can mandate thatwhatever open source software is consumed and produced have to have some of these attributes built into them. Basically inclusion of women, I also want to point out that inclusion of persons with disabilities is an important aspect. We work with Daisy Consortium andin Bangladesh you have actually seen inclusion of persons with disability in our policy making circle in our development community has actually changed the way we look at things. So I think that marginalized or they excluded communities, be it gender, be it persons with disabilities, need to be included by mandate. Sometimes that mandate could come fromthe government,sometimes thatmandate could come fromthe community open source community themselves. But it has to be written down perhaps, it has to be actually marked as a requirement by both sides. Thank you. >> Yeah,our communities are typically starve enough forresources that we don't want to turn anybody down regardless of where they're coming from. But one thing I'll say is just add to everything that's already been said is the eclipse foundation published last week some research that we did on open source in the global south. And one of the sort of two encouraging things andI encourage every people to go to our home page andfind it and read it andone of the things thatwas very strong in that is in the global south it's like they're already making,Google south is already making huge contributions to open source and they probably don't, it probably doesn't get as much recognition as it deserves. And also, but it was specifically called out thatwomen in particular find open source as an opportunity for career growth and empowerment. And so that was one of the strong results that came out of the survey that we did. So I mean, I think there's lots of work that still needs to be done. But it does seem that there's some encouraging signs out there that can be found if you look at the data. >> Thank you for the question. Thank you for the responses. There's a light on right in front of me. Yes. >> Go ahead. >> Hi there. My name is Denise Cooper. I founded Intersource Commons and did a bunch of other stuff, but that's the thing I'm doing now. So a really good panel, thank you very much. And when he said, when he told me he was going to say corporations are not people, I wanted to say something else about that. Sometimes corporations are still looking for open source halo by making large statements about loving open source and being on our side now and blah, blah, blah. And then when you actually try to work with them outside of Silicon Valley,they have not promulgated that message evenly within their own company. And what would be really cool is if people WHO can apply pressure of any kind would push that sothat it would be reasonable to,for advocates like myself to have global conversations because we all live in a global world,those of us thathave been flying for this movement for the last 30 years, right? To actually have a conversation with somebody WHO has been briefed fromit within and doesn't have to be relying on whatever they were told to say 25 years ago. Any chance that we think that people could do that? I mean, Mike, you know, we're in a position to do that, I think. And foundations work together for education a little bit more than they do now. But I know you guys have a pretty good education program. I'm shocked to think that you think I'm that powerful. So there's lots of corporations in this room that could help. But I think it's still fundamentally boils down to the same challenge that people are uneven. And I have never met any corporation where the embracing of -- so any corporation is sort of bigger than 100 people where the embracing of open source is uniform through the entire organization. I don't believe that that company exists. There's been -- there's centers of excellence,but there's,you know even companies that are very highly recognized asbeing strong open source proponents you can certainly find pockets in them that don't get it. So I think we still have lots of work to do. I do think that these things like,you know,manifestos,open source manifestos that are being published by a bunch of German automakers and so on are a signal of progress, but they're not a signal of success. I just -- so I think we just have to make sure that we're interpreting them correctly. I mean, it's a success that they were able to publish them, but it's a step along a journey. It's not the end of the journey. Mike, I'll agree with you. I think that it is a very long journey. A near and I were talking before the panel about how to inculcate that open source culture in governments and in businesses, and inculcating that culture is really hard. I mean, frankly, it's not even consistent across different open source communities and becomes very difficult to inculcate not only the open source culture but an understanding of the importance of open source to society and to businesses. And so I think that that will be a challenge for us, and I know it's one that you worked on for many years at a number of your employers. I think maybe it's job security for all of us, because I don't think this work is going to stop. So I just want to point out thatthere is one small sign of perhaps progress that coming from governments,which is a shock to actually saying this out loud but some elements of regulation might actually help the open source community. So one of the things that we have not figured this out yet but the Cyber Resilience Act is basically going to force corporations for the first time in history to actually give a crap about their upstream projects. They have a positive obligation to perform due diligence on the open source projects that they're shipping in their products,and that form of horizontal regulation has never existed before. I don't know exactly how that's going to play out, but that is a different kind of economic nudge thatcould incent corporate behavior in the right way that has not existed before. I'm not sure if I'm optimistic yet, but it's at least an interesting opportunity for how this could play out differently in the future. Let me add to what David said earlier,just the discussion thathe and I had on the culture of open source thinking. I think governments will be much more amenable to that, because governments don't make money by selling software. So I strongly believe that public services can be improved greatly by using open source. So governments will actually embrace open source. But what are corporations going to do? It's a question to Sophia actually. I don't know if I have to ask questions. What can Google do to promote open source or Microsoft? I will say candidly, the work is never done. It's just continual. I've been in the open source programs office for four years now. And companies shift. The people make up of the company is constantly changing. And so while maybe the core group of people understood it, five years later, it's a whole new group of people. And you have to kind of reconvert and re-educate. And so I honestly think in the open source programs office, our work is never done. We're constantly doing this, and we have to consistently keep doing it in order to try to preserve and encourage a culture of contribution. I'm going to take one more question. On second row in the back, you've had your head up for a while. Thank you very much, Sophia. My name is Yusuf Abdul Khadir. I'm here representing the Africa Community Internet Program which is a collaboration between the Africa Open Data Internet Research Foundation at Syracuse University. So really, a few key reflections and then a question. One reflection is the last time I was in this room. It was about nine years ago for the Sustainable Development Goals and helping to advocate on behalf of them. So to kind of shift us intothe theme of this really important convening around Ospoels forGood I want to ask the question to David and then to Anir. As a Bangladeshi Jamai, my wife is Bangladeshi, Bangladeshi is a particular space in my heart. And so I want to make sure to be keen to ask you a question as well. In the last few years, we've seen a catastrophic series. In fact, this week, it's disgustingly hot here in New York. We've felt it. I have worn five outfits, not because I'm a prima donna, but largely because it's very hot. And so I've had to change my clothes a few times because of the heat. And it's a reflection of the continual shifting climate that we're experiencing. We had a really important robust conversation yesterday on a panel that talked about the Global South. I would want to change the word to Global Majority just becausethat's wherewords have particular and explicit meaning and the words that we choose to use still present a kind of subordinate role of the majority of the planet. The majority of the people that are most desperately and directly impacted by the very conversations thatwe're having here today and that happen in this room every day of the year. And so to the question, how do we make sure that we not just have really important conversations,convenings,not thatwe talk aboutthe right words not that we,and I think you rightly put it,David,reference and recognize the tragedies of the commons thatcan be facilitated by not explicitly focusing on centering andempowering andbuilding and investing in diverse people,not because and I know someone said corporations aren't people, I think Mitt Romney might disagree. He would probably say corporations are people. That's another conversation for another day. How do we make sure that we really do take the theme of this discussion of OSPO's for good and make sure that open source program offices, that policy makers, that innovators, that academics, I have a receding hairline because I wear multiple hats, so I also work at meta. How do we make sure the corporations ensure that when we speak about for good, that the good is not just about buzzwords, that it's aboutensuring thatwe transform the conditions of the people for whom these really important conversations are sent around. So how do we, to just be more direct about the question,how do we use this forum today asa catalyst to not just accelerate but actually successfully implement the very lagging,sustainable development goals and achieve all of our human dignity,because this group of people here are dynamic andbrilliant but the part that worries me about being here nine years after the passage of the Sustainable Development Goals is that we are further now today than we've ever been. So what role can we play here? Long question, lots of reflections. >> Can we all get about 30 seconds to respond because we're out of time? >> Okay. So, because I have 30 seconds, I think that you should not be looking to people like Mike or myself to solve those problems. We as a community, an open source community, not just the community of people here today are going to have to take ownership of that problem. >> 30 seconds. So the six things that Andrea and Adriana actually put on the last slide, I think is an answer to that. And also on a personal note, I'll actually maybe change the name of our network fromsouth-south network for public service innovation to majority network for public service innovation. Thank you. >> All right. I'm going to cap it. Thank you so much to our panelists. Thank you for all the questions we received. I'm sorry we weren't able to get to all of them, but we will be here. Please come talk to us. Clearly, we're passionate about this topic. So keep you the questions coming and thank you so much for your participation. [ Applause ] >> Hi, everyone. So what a great start to the day. I really enjoyed that discussion. Thank you to Adriana, Sofia and the rest of our panel for leading such interesting and timely discussions. We're actually going to build on this discussion a little bit and continue to be a bit more interactive. So initially on your agenda, you would have seen that we had prepared breakout sessions. What we're going to do more is kind of a facilitated roundtable discussion withsome members of the audience andpeople that we've identified in the chamber to kind of continue this conversation around open source innovation andopen source at work in the world. So to lead us through that discussion, please welcome back Omar. >> Hi, everyone. [ Applause ] So this is an interesting portion of the conference wherewe just -- there's just so many incredible people in the room thatwe want to give opportunity to others to a lot of some of you to share with us your experiences. So I have an amazing lineup of people. I'll be calling on and just please make sure you press the microphone. You have three, four minutes if you could talk to us about the work that you're doing in open source and try to inspire us about some of the successes and maybe you'll also share with us some of the challenges you get. So my first speaker would be Phuimang from UNICEF's Digital Center of Excellence. >> Thank you, Omar. And it's been a great two days and first congratulations for pulling us all together. So a little bit about UNICEF. Yesterday, I have a colleague that actually was on the panel talking aboutthe work thatwe do andshe mentioned aboutUNICEF and innovation. So what I want to share today with everyone is what do we do UNICEF in using open source to contribute to the achievement of child's rights around the world. We are seeing an avalanche of transformation with the governments. A lot of the governments that we work with so far is going through digital transformation. And if digital is an enabling function to make governments to better deliver results for children, then we see open source is a very, very key tool. In terms of the work that we do with governments comprising from health,education,child protection so I just want to give a few examples to reassure the group here today that governments are with us and it's about how we engage with them. With health in the health sector,UNICEF has been working with our partner Digital Square to maintain the repository of mature open source solutions thatactually range from health information system to facility registries to vaccine supply chain systems. So all of this work is it's abouthow to help governments to think aboutadaptations improvements and usage of those health, digital public goods in an effective and fast manner. So the example that we can give is thatthe open source health management information system DHIS2 the district health information system too that has been used in more than 40 countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America. The list doesn't stop there considering UNICEF's mandate is across health, education, child protection and the list goes on to actually advance the rights of children. We also have extensive work in education, child protection and so forth. One of the things thatit's worthwhile to mention is that we're also very much behind a messaging platform called RapidPro whereby it integrates withthe rest the range of messaging tools such as WhatsApp that we use to communicate and engage with end users including medical healthcare workers,promote real time monitoring andthis is an open source platform andthis is also a digital public good thatwe have been promoting andusing for the last 10 years. And this is I think in the latest data that we have we're actually transacting more than a billion messages annually andagain this is an open source solution and that has been scaled widely. In the last two days especially during the panel just now I hear it over and over again abouthow do we increase the adoption and use of DPGs or just open source software? It is not an easy feat but I think what I want to share about our experience is that the key challenges thatwe see in the UN and the broader open source ecosystem it's about lack of skill,lack of sustainability andlack of adoption while UNICEF is not a tech company but we try our best to see how we could push the envelope becausewe think that with the governments thatwe are working withthe more asa UN organization we push that narrative the better it is for the open source community. The way that we do this is not by giving them money to say you just use it the way that we do it is on the capacity building rather than treating open source asa distinct subject our internal efforts as focus on how to help the government to strengthen their business analysis practice whenthey come to us so that they can plan for digital initiatives for programmatic delivery. We specifically emphasize on the notion of digital resilience which cover information security data protection ethical use of data software maturity assessment total cost of ownership so these are the areas that we find most of the end user of open source which is in this case the government can find it really useful so some foot for thought for the community here when you think about how you want to solve the problem and have that entry point. The last thing I want to share is the fact that we continue to face challenge of the key obstacle of funding. It is not an easy one despite the fact thatyou know we have foundations and governments are interested for it but how to fund open source for good projects that can last for a very very long time the way that we try to solve this problem is not to ask for more money is actually to create a strong business ecosystem sothat the companies that behind the open source community and the open source software could actually be self sustained and grow andwe are now experimenting various funding model the latest one that we are experimenting is called social franchising that we are using it on a open source app called Okey. With that I want to hand it back to you Omar I continue to look foryou know ideas and comments from the amazing community here for us to advance our work. Thank you for your name. We have as a second speaker a hand from CERN if you could be too many. Thank you very much Omar it's a pleasure for me to be here. CERN you know this particle accelerator at CERN you wonder you know what what do we hear. Interesting enough I think we have a long history of open signs and open source and open data and that has found its way through a large physics community around the world butwe really care also to see how can all that software that has been developed over the last decades be used for other use cases and other domains and in fact that's where we see most of the interesting innovations happening you know we have examples of software developed at CERN in biology and health care and fraud attacks andwhat have you and my message here would be at CERN or OSPO believes of course we should save the internal community WHO should help people understand how to get everything to open source butalso I think the OSPO plays a role to accommodate for creating partnerships beyond our own domain because that's where most interesting innovation aspects happen if you put people as a physics background together with people as a biology background and what we've learned there is it's not a matter of just throwing the software over the wall but really to set a project so people collaborate together and you look for funding and I believe all thatis a role of the Ospos aswell so that's what I wanted to bring across I believe thatif you want to do OSPO forgood we have to roll up the sleeves and create these projects together. Thank you. Thank you very much. As a next speaker we have with us Mr. Frederick Blachetta WHO's the chief data officer at the German Chancellor. Mark and thanks everyone for being here. I mean it's astonishing last year I don't know WHO has been there we were sitting in a small room downstairs I think it was right so in Omar and others were of course showing us also around a little bit and we were also here on the second floor also in the Echosog room. We were not able to go to the Echosog room because President Modi was doing the World Yoga Day here at the facilities and for bad weather reasons every one of the bigger rooms have been reserved so it was possible to do that because it was only I think 60 to 70 people roundish maybe free digit I don't know butit is astonishing to see also as part of the program committee where we are now with all of you here in the room I mean many of you are new of the conference last year just afterwards and we're like what was happening there why haven't we been invited and it's great to see you all here andthanks again to the UN,to you Omar and the team for this very huge occasion and for this great organization thank you so much. I think yes you should do round of applause. It has been numerous exciting contexts in various spaces of the ecosystem during the last days and as Omar mentioned my role is focusing a lot more on initiatives in data science and artificial intelligence in the German government soI could elaborate a lot more on the specific topics I did with some of you already during the last days but what I would like to do right now is taking a more general approach and a more some more general hypothesis maybe to give us also an avocados di aboli to get to think a little bit more aboutsome of these topics so my first hypothesis I'm always giving this one out becauseI think it's important to keep thatin mind when you're interacting with government organizations is the maturity of government IT organizations is relatively low and the maturity means in many various ways it is not in that one specific way in the IT management or in the IT operations or any other but rather in all of them so we see in governments throughout the globe that governments are a little bit behind what you get asan experience or anything similar not only in the interaction itself but also in the management of IT by themselves so to what does this lead I mean we are always talking about Verizon was here andwe know aboutother fortune 500 andothers about how open source of where is such widespread during all of these companies and this comes for a reason because they have high maturity in their IT organizations andwhat this makes for governments is governments make hard choices andfor them the hard choices they go with the dependency in most of the ways becauseit's easier for them to have a bundling to get the services also andto go thatroute andI'm not saying that this is the best way obviously also part why I'm here is I think we have to change this forvarious ways but I think we have to find the right solution for that and also to get that into our minds a little bit more when we get intothe exchange not being too upfront on these butthink about how we can get this networking more together andI think conference like these are instrumental forthat butwe need also more institutionalized approaches for this we need institutionalized organizations which are putting these these efforts together the efforts that we saw today in the morning by Germany withZendes and the sovereign tech fund I think are good practices of how governments on the national level can work ahead butthey are just national level efforts so they they are not at all contributions to a multinational as also the open source system exchange the second hypothesis I would love to mention is on the hypothesis that Adriana did in the morning thatthe success of open source software is eating open source because I think we have to discuss this a little bit more I mean I was working also in the private sector in advisory also for tech companies and open source companies and to be honest and don't shoot me on this one please open source is too complex in many ways so what I just mentioned before the maturity of IT organizations is bad but there's also another side of that of course right sofor an outsider asI was like five years ago and then starting to get into the field to be honest at least in the German andEuropeans part also it is so segmented it is so fragmented it is so many players in the space which are not really coordinated which are not always working trustful together they are not always keeping the open source principles by heart on themselves and I think this is something everyone has to work up on also in this room we need those bridge builders andwe need transparency and trustful connections to work up on the way that we can really see open source growing also in the government area andalso as we discussed I think this is a very important point throughout the globe be it the globe itself or be it the developed countries by themselves so I would like to sum this up a little bit andjust say I think places like this wherethe ecosystem fromall of the different stakeholders is coming together are the right places we need we it is asalways as these kinds of workshops and retreats right everyone is walking around afterwards we are all going home we are like wow it was soexciting you know and nobody is doing a real follow-up so what I ask all of you to do in the room is think about this hypothesis or the hypothesis that you found very useful in the last days spread the word on them whichever medium is the right one foryou guys andgirls and let's try to to get yourself to follow-ups which you are really following throughwith someone in this room that we can really build this on and maybe next year we need a bigger room forthis one thank you somuch and have a nice time thank you thank you so much mr. Blasheta smart man tell me one day a code that I use all the time he said if if data is the new gold software is its refineries and I use that all the time becausewe tend to forget the power and the importance of software the president WHO's had this code is here withus sosay yet should we from Carnegie Mellon University

thank you Omar I am the associate dean for digital infrastructure and director of the open source programs office at Carnegie Mellon University University hospitals are still relatively new sothere's no definitive blueprint butrather set up early experiences and lessons learned we are learning fromexisting ospos particularly fromthe private sector through exchanges with the software foundations butwe also need to adapt existing OSPO frameworks for the academic context given the unique mission culture andstrategy it's also important to note thateach academic division within the university has its own mission culture andstrategy as well at the heart of universities thatthe pillars of research education and translation of research and education for various reasons such as commercialization and community impact so we are exploring the world that open source software can play to support these pillars of a university fundamentally the CMU OSPO acts as a community convener a center of competency and a set of services thathelp better identify andmanage sustain and share software we are actively engaged in what can be accomplished as our open source software reaches a level of maturity and capacity examples include multiple projects to support the sustainable development goals and digital public goods research around cybersecurity supporting automated science particularly towards democratizing science andeducation using open source software asa laboratory with hands-on real-world software engineering experience forstudents WHOwork withthe mentors from those open source projects it's important forme to note that CMU is part of a new network called curious whichis spelled c-u-r-i-o-s-s the community of university and research institution OSPO's it includes 20 university or research institution OSPO's within the u-s and europe with support fromthe alpha p Sloan foundation through this network we are starting to explore what we can do is our collective open source capacity grows one example is a new program we are launching next week at CMU called the open forum for AI this is a university led partnership with CMU working withthree other OSPO's fromthe curious network and also partnerships include open source initiative andAtlantic Council withindividual fellows from the private and government sector the goal is to bend the arc toward responsible ethical and transparent AI through original research technical prototypes community engagement policy recommendations and talent forservice we feel that this is one of the first examples of how a network of university OSPO's can come together to build capacity andto have influence through OSPO's for good many of the other university curious university OSPO leaders are in the room i would encourage you to talk withthem soyou can find out aboutthe excellent work that they are doing as well thank you thank you very much say it for reminding us the importance of OSPO's we hear all forthe forthese two days to celebrate the OSPO's the concept of OSPO's so thank you for showing us forsharing with us some of the lessons of building one my next speaker i want to go to Wolfgang WHO's the head of OSPO forMercedes-Benz it's a very interesting case study thatOSPO that Wolfgang would share withus as i mentioned yesterday we're in the process of building the UN open source principles and we want these to once they are approved by by all of us all the UN agencies to transcend beyond the UN and Wolfgang had an interesting example of how it went beyond the car industry please yeah thank you um so we first adopted open source in open source intoour official IT strategy at Mercedes-Benz in 2018 and two years later in 2020 we first published our Mercedes-Benz FOS manifesto which is a public commitment to FOS free andopen source software andso it's a set of rules andguidelines which proclaim the importance of FOS fora modern tech organization with the goal to facilitate the cultural change in Mercedes-Benz IT andsubsidiaries towards in-run open source so it doesn't only allow our engineers to use FOS butit actually actively sends them on that mission to use FOS in your own development yes butplease also contribute back andalso publish more andmore of our own stuff as open source in order to be a good citizen in the open source world and there's still more work to do in the company of course buti think it's been quite a success sofar or as Mike earlier put it in progress which is already good right the FOS manifesto itself is open source with the most permissive license in order to well encourage anybody any company to take it anddo with it what they want to you know take it andthen change it adopted to their company principles and several big companies have sofar done exactly that the first ones to adopt it was the continental automotive company and then followed by Siemens andthen Porsche joined andthen Aetas WHO is a Bosch company and then at the end of last year was the German railroad company Deutsche Bahn and just a few weeks ago the latest adoptions thati know of are fromKariat from Volkswagen and also the German software giant SAP soso far the manifesto has been for the private sector but a related activity at the United Nations is what Omar just mentioned andtalked aboutyesterday the ongoing work withthe open source principles andi'm i'm absolutely sure that these are going to be a huge success withthe power to make a real difference in the world sorry so at Mercedes Benz we're also supporting open source by being members of several open source foundations WHO do a tremendously good job to foster open source and we also sponsor open source projects financially andhere i also hope thatthis can be a model forother companies because this can really help to make open source more sustainable right if every company just gives a little bit it will add up to a big amount so i'm really curious Omar to see what the final open source principles fromthe United Nations are going to be andso thank you for this thank you Omar for the great work andthanks everybody else soi had time there to be to arrive to be 12 andi think we're like two minutes before soi think you're the last speaker so that's perfect timing i pass it to Nick forso we are now aboutto have a lunch break forone hour so please be back in the room at two o'clock i had a lot of questions soif you go through the third floor you go down there's an elevator thattakes you to the fourth floor wherethere's a cafeteria so but not this elevator right here go down cross andthen another big set of elevators and then you will be able to get to the fourth floor cafeteria if you go 1b you can go to another cafeteria so there are two cafeterias in here please let's be back at two o'clock we have a very very interesting panel about open source and use

a one o'clock sorry it's one in one hour post so let's please be here at one o'clock let me say one o'clock for UNICEF run panel open source and use thank you everyone
