---
title: "k1b-k1b443e64t-English"
source: "k1b-k1b443e64t-English.txt"
generated_by: normalize_captions.py
format: simplified transcript
---

# k1b-k1b443e64t-English

> This is a simplified Markdown transcript generated from cleaned captions.
> Timestamps were removed. Speaker attribution is not inferred unless added in a later review pass.

## Transcript

So we're off to our last two sessions with a great lineup of speakers. But before we get to that, we'll start with a quiz with the audience. Okay. So first question is this. Please raise your hand andthen you can open your microphone if you know where the QR code for the feedback form is. I see there in orange. Do you want to turn on your mic and tell us? Or is she showing it? Okay. So if anyone wants to fill out the form go to her or you can also go to the doors when you're exiting, you have those on both sides. Another question what can you do if you're having a hard time hearing what the speakers are saying, raise your hand if you know the answer. Over here. Excellent. Use one of the ear pieces. And also we have tons of space here now. So feel free to come closer. All right. It's time. So let's,I'm going to head in and I'm going to be giving the microphone to my dear colleague Philippo, WHO is going to be moderating in the next session. Over to you, Philippo. Thanks, Papi. Hi, everyone. I know thatwe are among the last things between you andthe reception,so do bear with us but you're going to have a very interesting and exciting session called open agents governing the next generation of autonomous AI systems and this session will cover how AI agents are already capable of planning, acting, executing tasks autonomously across digital environments, and what are the challenges and opportunities of AI agents, of course, from also an open source perspective andwhat are,what is the meaning and the opportunities of international cooperation on AI agents. And of course you'll hear fromdifferent perspectives on this but without any further ado,let me give the floor to the opening keynote, Ted Style of Professor David Schreer, WHO's a professor of practice at the Imperial College of London,and somuch more than this but it told me not to say the introduction,so Professor Schreer,please you have the floor. Thank you so much. Can you hear me okay? Is this better? All right. Hi. So,I'll try andkeep this moving quickly sothat we can get to the panel what I'm going to speak to you aboutto tee things up is something called intelligence capital and how we create the agent-based enterprise. Around the turn of the year, I was updating some work I had done a few years ago with the investment bank Evercore on valuing the hyperscalers and valuing all the AI companies because we were all scratching our heads and saying, why are they worth so much money? This doesn't make sense based on sort of rational norms of valuation. We dug in a little more andrealized that the old way of looking at things was not how the world was turning and that we were entering a new era. As I dove deeper down the rabbit hole,I came back withintelligence capital which I shared first at Devos andtoday we're going to go a little deeper into how it plays out at the enterprise. The basic idea, next slide, is that value creation is no longer coming from looking at a stream of future cash flows, which is how we used to value companies. Instead, we are looking at a stream of future intelligence flows. This is something we call intelligence capital. For the first time, we have an asset that increases in value the more you use it. So this iPad, as soon as I took it out of the box, it started losing value, it began depreciating. As soon as I used it more, it lost more value. But intelligence, the more you use it, the more it's worth. And this is true for human intelligence as much as artificial intelligence or, and this is what we'll talk about today, these hybrid systems where you combine people and agents to generate disproportionate return. So you take that unit of a person and an agent together and you give it a process. You make it own a process and you have it go out and capture knowledge and learning, refine knowledge and learning, and then compound that knowledge. So in technical terms,you could kind of think of that as like retrieval augmented generation. But you improve the value of that knowledge as you're using it. And if you set up a portfolio of these little units of people andagents together you can generate massive economic returns. I'm going to dive in a little deeper on this. But the important takeaway here is that the objective of the enterprise is no longer to sort of maximize cash flows, but instead to maximize intelligence flows. Unfortunately, as people are playing around with AI these days, they're proudly touting their AI adoption rates. That is a vanity metric. We should not be looking at that. We should be looking at what are the intelligence flows that the organization is creating. Next slide. So if you go back to you may or may not have heard of something called the theory of the firm. Ronald Coss came out with this idea of how to organize companies and sort of based on the German general staff model. So in the 1930s,late 1930s,he proposed this theory of the firm where he had a CEO at the top andhe had this organizational hierarchy with people in different functional specialties and little boxes underneath the functional leaders. Well, that's the old way of doing things. In the era of intelligence capital,instead you organize around a portfolio of these little units that we call intelligence capital generators. And you're constantly running thousands of experiments. Most of them fail. Some of them succeed and generate disproportionate returns. You get what's called a power law curve of returns. It's a new way to organize a company. Now mind you, or any kind of enterprise, doesn't have to be a for profit enterprise. Now mind you,this idea of like a liquid labor market where people are in these little pods is actually not new. Everyone fromUnilever to Valve software have been playing around withthis for 20 years. What's different is the RISE of the human agent system and having that be that sort of unit of productivity. Next slide. So what that looks like is you put a human in an agent inside something we call an intelligence capital engine. By the way, all of this is at intelligencegenerators.com. So you can download the slides there and there's also a white paper. But you have this little intelligence capital engine thatcaptures knowledge and learning defines it, and then compounds it as it's being used. Take that engine and stick it in something we call an intelligence capital generator. What is a generator? A generator owns a defined business process. It retains memory and feedback. It improves its unit economics over time. And this is something my colleague Tricia Wang is going to speak about,I think on the panel a little bit. It operates under audible control. You have something called proof of control. As we start to deploy these agents andthese agent human systems out in the world we need to make sure that we have strong assurance that they were doing what they're supposed to do and not doing what they're not supposed to do. So next slide,you take a bunch of these generators andyou stick them into a portfolio of these constantly regenerating experiments. And so now intelligence capital in your firm is governed as a portfolio. And the kind of people that you have have to be trained on how to operate in this more liquid fluid environment which kind of looks like a well-run open source community in its dynamics. And as I was thinking about that for this week in particular in this conversation, I was thinking aboutin the intelligence capital economy what is the role of open source? We are here in the United Nations. 193 countries are right now trying to navigate between Shilla andSharbitis trying to navigate between the U. S. and China AI systems. Open source provides a third way. Next slide. Open source provides us an opportunity to explore sovereign intelligence in a way beneficial for humanity. And with that, I'm going to turn things back to our moderator and I think we're going to get the panel started. So I'm David Schreier with Imperial College. If you go to aicollab.org,we've got a number of white papers on sovereign AI on intelligence capital, a little more on our work at Imperial. Thank you so much. And I will now go and explore while I go back on stage what this third way could look like and helping us explore again what open source can do for AI agents and vice versa. Let me introduce the panel. Shara Hooker,she is the chief executive officer at Adaption AI and former vice president of cohere where she led queer labs. So welcome on stage. And we have Yongwaleen,she's the vice president,CTO the Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence formerly the director of IBM China Research Lab. Going to the UN colleagues,Mostafa Alcardi senior cybersecurity solution officer are UNNICC. That is the UN International Computing Center in Valencia and the co-chair of the open source community of practice. Last butnot least,Tricia Wang she's the chief executive officer of advanced AI society and she's a public interest technologist. And of course, David, welcome back on stage. So to start with,I think we will go in the order of coding and I will invite you to share in three minutes some observational reflection of what we heard fromDavid and on the topic of this panel and then we will go back and forth with some follow-up questions. And you should be able to, I think this is a very needed forum. Although I just learned thatFilippo,a moderator is not the very UN in his support of World Cup teams since Italy didn't make it, he's not supporting anyone. But it's fantastic. Let me maybe kick things off. I like to make things relevant. This conversation is bringing together stakeholders andpeople WHOcare about open source. For that,it's a lot aboutWHO gets to own technology and WHO gets to shape intelligence. My career as a computer scientist, I feel like I've done my tour of duty at different frontier labs. I was at DeepMind and then I led the research arm at Cohere. For the last 10 years,the dynamic has been such as came across actually in your slides that you place immense amounts of capital and you build the biggest model. And in fact,the primary ingredient of progress for the last 10 years was scaling model size. What's quite refreshing about this moment and this panel is that I wrote a grumpy paper about this which was late last year, the slow death of scaling. So scaling model size is largely, I would say, at its end as a formula. Instead, so much of progress is going to be how a model interacts with the world. And why does this matter for this gathering? The dynamics are completely different. So for pre-training, you need massive amounts of compute. You need to co-locate it in the same place because you don't want to distribute across data centers and there's massive various entry. Most rate of return for compute, where you get bang for your buck, is now moving into post-training. It's moving to interaction with the world. It's moving to a gentic. This is a way more distributed form of compute and you can get much more with less. Why that's interesting is thatwe often end up in these rooms kind of gloomy about like all the state of open source and WHO can shape. But the dynamics are shaping are completely changing. I would also say another reason why I care deeply about this topic of how does a gentic shape WHO gets access is that there's another component to this. One of the things that's really accelerating is how we do scientific innovation. One of the things thatwe're working on is how do we train models thatlearn from researchers how they can be optimized? One of the biggest obstacles to sovereign AI, to people owning AI, is the know-how, which is currently concentrated in a handful of labs. And a lot of what we're doing even withauto scientists and other projects is how can we empower innovation cycles that are much faster outside of this handful of labs. And so there's a few themes there, but one I would say the barriers to entry of people shaping innovation has dramatically changed over the last two years. People are not going to fore-accessize their model anymore. And the second is we're actually learning how to learn, which means that we can really give people the possibility of shaping their AI outside of these labs. But with that, let me pass on WHO is next. This is Yung Hwa from Beijing Academy of AI. For our institute we are the nonprofit institute focused on all the whole stack of AI research from the model to the data, aeration, and AI compute. And all of our things actually are the open source. So back to the Davis talk, I think it's very impressive. And I also feel that the people might notice that he mentioned sometime, currently for AI have the two very important cameras and China and US, right? So actually, we also noticed that we also want in the global, we don't need to do these kinds of tools,choice,and we can benefit all the outcomes from these different countries. So currently on one way is the model, right? The model fromthe different countries,they change the model and open source the model. So the people, you can choose any model you want. So that's the one way through the open source, you already can solve that. But on the other hand, you might also need to think about how to run the model on the different hardware, and really today the computer resource is very expensive. And also for different countries, including the US, Europe, and also China, different countries, they're also building their hardware. So on the other hand,the people might also think aboutwhich hardware should I buy right from which country. So we also want people don't need to make this hard decision. So that's why we also built a stack, open source stack called FLATOS. That is to allow the different model can run on different hardware without any coding. So we actually have the tool, can allow the model download, and if that model changed on some US devices,then throughthe tool it can very easily migrate on to the different hardware,which generates or built fromChina,or on the other hand the model if it changed on the hardware from the China, and it can migrate on to the US or, for example, a media hardware. So that means that for the user today, you don't need to struggle, we also don't want you to struggle on the choose which countries technology. We also want the AI to be inclusive. Thank you so much. Let's go in order, please. Thank you. Yeah,so I think this is a really interesting time,I agree withSarah that there's a lot of room forinnovation right now,and especially whenI hear about David's talk on intelligence capital andsaying this is the future and we're all going to be yielding all this benefits from intelligence capital, but I think the most important thing we have to figure out is thatno one's going to want to participate in this world if we don't trust and we don't have a way to figure out how do I know this agent is acting on my behalf? And thatmy behalf can be an enterprise,it could be an individual it could be a nation state,it could be a government,and I think this is the most important thing that we have to figure out,and at the Advanced AI Society,our mission and our purpose is to make sure that as an industry association, building out the public goods for verifiable AI, that this is one of the key pieces thatare missing fromthe story right now because there's a lot of discussion on we need responsible AI or ethical AI, or AI for good, but all this is about what AI should do instead of, well, what can AI do right now? And there's all this incredible technology that's been developed in the decentralized tech space, or in cryptography, that is a really latent market that can be applied to making AI secure, because the biggest thing that's missing right now is all this like kind of hype over AI,we're not really talking enough aboutAI security and the need for us to trust,and forus to trust AI,verification is at the basis,it's a precondition fortrust that we have to be able to know how do we verify this AI did what it said it was going to do,and right now we live in a claims-based AI world where you don't really know that the AI did what you wanted to do, you know, it's based on assertions, that's how these models work,and what we need to move intois a verification-based world where it's based on evidence,and thatevidence actually the most tamper-resistant kind is cryptographic. In cryptography is a really,I think it's going to have its moment right now we usually cryptographers andcybersecurity leaders have been left out of the conversation when it comes to innovation, because usually people are scared, you know, like engineers are scared to talk to the cybersecurity people becausethey're seen as a no people or locking down the perimeter,but now I think the cybersecurity industry,what their job is you know,is in order to make agents useful andvaluable and they have to figure out how do you decrease the risk,but foran agent to be useful,you have to be multi-cloud you have to be multi-vendor and so the job of right now of cybersecurity is to figure out how do we make AI secure and one of the greatest toolboxes, and the tools that we're seeing from the companies that are, the innovations are coming from companies that are adopting verifiable AI, which means that you have cryptographic, you know, security at the core, that's one of the core pieces,and the reason why this industry is soimportant as a latent market is that cryptography has really figured out, how do you share, how do you verify a fact, how do you verify something happened without releasing all the information and this is going to be super important now,which is if you want your intelligence to be shared to be used in any way, you need to be able to move that intelligence, right, that intelligence has to be portable,your agent has to go andlike move intoother clouds and vendors or spaces or other nations,other,you know,warehouses to do stuff but you need to be able to confirm you know, the agent's identity, you know, it's privacy, WHO authorized it to do that, what was the chain of delegation, what was the agent's provenance, well, all of these things are now being solved through all of these various mechanisms using cryptographic means, through ledger, distributed means, decentralized means, so I'm really excited to,I think this is like one of the most exciting moments for open source is to actually think about now,not just like open data or open standards andopen hardware but this is really I think the moment to shift into,to expand open source intothinking about open verification and that verification has to be open, you know, it cannot just be like anyone saying, well, I can verify that because verification cannot belong to the verified. Thank you, Mustafa. Listening to David's presentations today,the one thing that kind of struck me the most is the idea of the intelligence the intelligence harnessing components of your framework. I believe,I believe this is actually one of the most critical components that most enterprises will eventually realize. I think every agent,first of all,I want to separate AI models fromagents from anything else. I'm only talking about agents right now. The part that struck me the most is, it's true that every agent on its own, working on different things,building their own memory in a way that they are not talking to each other. But if you have that close, self-evolving loop, eventually this harnessing of all those different intelligence sources intoone becomes even bigger and stronger than the total of all the components of it. So this is key and I think this is going to be one of the most critical design patterns. When you're talking aboutagents in the workforce moving forward I think there's already some of this in the market today, but this is going to become the future norms. Another area that I wanted to kind of highlight here is open source. We are an open source suite and open source is actually an opportunity to solve some of the problems of the AI world. One of the biggest issues was the transparency of AI. How do we know that the logic or the code behind the blocks is actually doing something for our benefit as individuals or also as an enterprise? So open source basically is transparency. So you open the box and you let everybody inspect and see what's in there to make sure and you can trust the system. This is key. The more we work with agents over time, the more we need to actually trust it. If you are not able to trust the system you most likely will not use it or you'd be hesitant to use it in sensitive areas. Was that I think those two points is key. David, do you want to say a couple of words? Yeah,so just to pick up on Mustafa's point I think the question of orchestration is going to be one of the most interesting and complex challenges that we can take on. How we manage not just one agent buta whole array of agents in a symphony that then does great things foran enterprise,for a society,for a group of people for a bunch of friends. And so I'm really looking forward to see how people build these orchestration systems in a way that is safe, reliable, and trustworthy. Thanks so much. Now that we have all the elements laid in front of the table, let's try to make a meal in a decent one withall this suggestion andall these elements that the panelists brought up. Let me start with Sarah that you mentioned, you mentioned your paper, this low debt of scaling andnow we have the rapid RISE of an agentic AI and I wanted to bring this from a user perspective like what changes we can expect when we're moving from just humans or all of us using AI tools to humans interacting and working alongside agents. Yeah, and maybe to kick off I'll comment because there was some fun topics there. I want to just briefly touch on harnesses because you know what's crazy? Harnesses can either compound proprietary advantages or they can open up. Frankly,some harnesses thatproprietary firms build don't work with any other model but that firm. So you have more lock in. I think the question of harness is super interesting because so much of also what we're seeing now, this push, the momentum in this room is largely because in recent weeks we have seen decisions to withhold certain models people have realized there needs to be a diversity of options and an ability to have a pool of models for access. So I think this forum is happening at a very interesting time. Key to thatif you care abouthow do you leverage pools of models which is much more akin to our own intelligence by the way. We all showed up here, we all showed up at the same time. Even intelligence is really individual, it's much more collective, frankly. But this idea of how to harness it,one I'll say this,the fact that there is no consensus on how to do it is very interesting and a general harness is typically built for all tasks whichmeans it's very inefficient token wise and it's very inefficient on your task. For me this is a, it's a meta optimization problem. I think that a lot of what we'll see is like how do you auto-learn the right harness for the right task and I think the burden placed on the user right now is pretty extreme and I actually think that needs to shift much more to not placing. Ideally a user isn't doing all the acrobatics of today like massive prompts trying to figure out how to piece things together. We should be auto-learning a lot of thatand then just really getting on with the user's task. What is the place of how humans should interact with agents? So you know it's interesting because it's actually pretty critical. The two areas whichI've seen the most development frankly I'm trained as a computer scientist have been code and design and I'll share why because those had interfaces that we were used to, that we typically use and we gave a ton of feedback along the way. All of the tasks are completely underserved by current interfaces and they instead present it with a chat and a thumbs up, thumbs down. I see you know our vision is thatthe whole stack should be adaptable but for AI to work for everyday tasks thatare outside of computing and design you have to have dynamic interfaces that allow people to get feedback and someone has to feel like the model actually changes real time when they give feedback. Right now if you give feedback in a chat WHO knows when that model will change? Like you have to wait for the next version and so I actually think for the first time ever the most intelligent system will be the one thatcares aboutinterface and cares about how people give feedback. There are other computer scientists WHO have the opposite approach right? They believe in browser agents and crawling how the internet is. I frankly don't think that will be very successful. I think that we already know from tasks that is where humans find interfaces useful and are intervening frequently along the way that it's very possible to build systems that will be useful and so I'm much more interested in that. Like how do we build dynamic adaptable interfaces? We do a lot of work on dynamic visualizations,dynamic kind of tools which is really to allow humans to be in the front row and to be in the driving scene. Thanks somuch andalso thanks forraising the issue of that is I think he was an underlying team of capacity, you mentioned the use of token that of course is like the data, like the GPU. Yeah,it's kind of like sounequally distributed and the young guy you mentioned a very important aspect of talking aboutstack thatis the hardware component and of course it's not just a software component butit's a hardware component and I'm talking again expanding on this stack that you mentioned I wanted to dive a bit deeper on what are the technical foundation that are the most critical to make sure that you can build an open source in agent decay models that are reliable but they are also scalable. Thank you, actually what I'm mentioned just now is the concept about the open compute. Because we do want a different model can run on different hardware thatmeans that if you have more choice then you have the chance to lower the price, right? And also in today's very compressed agentic system is not only the single model you can apply the different model, large model or smaller size model for different purpose to work together. So that's why we think that to allow the different hardware can support the different model this is very important to make the agentic system more scalable and so this is very important to the first point and the second point actually is about the reliable, I do think thatthe reliable on one hand is of course because the information security issue then we need to consider sometimes we need to consider how to deploy the overall agentic system together withthe model in the proprietary way so that's why we need to consider how to put the model into different hardware but on the other hand the reliable also means for the how you benchmark verify it andtoday we do see that from the different kinds of benchmark one is to develop the framework to evaluate the successful ratio of the completion the second is the efficiency to finish the task in terms of the time and the last is how much token you will spend on this agentic system to finish the task so for different angle it's also very important to consider for the sustainable and also the reliable. Thank you andsince you touched upon verification let me turn to Mustaf and also like echoing what Trisha was saying that we live in a claim-based AI world, what I wanted to ask is what does two different things actually,what does it mean verification for the architecture of AI agentic systems and also just before getting on stage you mentioned a new UN acronym that is always good to learn thatis on OSARA that is open source agentic research architecture so maybe whileyou cover and the verification you can also see a couple of words on the device absolutely so for us to be able to have some kind of accountability on the transactions of the agents we need to be able to trace the all the transactions back to the agent the source of all of thatand every single transaction has to be in a way where you cannot basically change it after andyou can be able to defend it in a way so verification is the key here if you cannot verify that the agent done those things at this time you are not going to be able to trust it andthen you will have all kind of problems down the line so that's why we have to get this right the identity components of the agent this is something thateverybody is talking aboutit if you see any futuristic design or proposed design for the new harness is always going to have that identity component also going back to what Sarah was talking earlier about the human plus agent as a new operating model moving forward I genuinely believe thatthis is going to become the reality not because it's there's a choice this is the best actually it's not it's not a choice after going through a whole lot of research and this by the way I come froma very long history of software architectures and cybersecurity framework development over the past soI totally understand what the value is for identity and being able to verify that and capture over time coming to us are as a part of the work that we are doing in the open source United is a community of practice of the United Nations responsible foropen source projects and facilitate all the work across the different agencies one of the initiative that we just have is called a SARS opens open sovereign agent reference architecture is actually a two tracks one is a specification documentation explaining what are the main components inside the harness of the agent that must remain open andthere are others that it could be open it could be restricted or closed whatever you want it it also separates the intelligence source all the AI models outside it treats it like a battery in the car you can swap it out anytime you want but that's not going to change the functioning of the actual agent itself it also comes with us all the protocols and the different layers of the agent we believe that the person is going to have their own personal agents the enterprise is going to have their own agent the brain that will be functioning on their behalf eventually also a G agent where it will function on behalf of all the different government entities we had a roadmap like the entire thing is probably going to be become reality was in the next two or three years even maybe longer I don't know butthe other part of that is actually a document is called AI bill of rights this is documents almost like a policy or or guidance if you would it explains all the roles that the person will have to do to take care of their agent because that's going to be representing them also for the enterprise what the responsibilities they are if they're going to allow a person to bring their own agent to work in the future what are the different things that they have to ensure as far as compatibility goes and then further and most importantly the role of government in this area how are they going to facilitate and what are the building blocks that they must have at the at the country level in order to have or facilitate that ecosystem between all different types of of agents some of the aspects of it already exist today but we were able to kind of put all thattogether in a way that it give you the design of the car andalso the the roads andthe dimensions andeverything in one go so this way we don't have that chicken and egg problem that we have and right now was regulations and design. Thanks and Tricia going back to you almost a very important point that is eventually the question always responsible forthe actions that agents all sorts of agents will be taking and Tricia you cover the dimension of safety so my question for you what we're hearing the conversation of the UN from member states from the private sector from stakeholders and we are talking aboutopen source andaccountability and transparency sometimes there is almost a money cam view is either open source automatically creates a accountability to transparency or open source is terrible foraccountability becauseof transparency so if you could elaborate on this yeah I mean this is a problem that's been solved by the open source world already so I don't know why we have to keep like litigating it becauseyou know like for example enterprise solved this you know there was a time where enterprise said oh we don't want to use open source becausewe haven't solved forthe security stuff but like the whole point of open source is thatwe are able to inspect the code andhow something was built but what enterprises had withtheir own security concerns and so you know OSI red hat we have Linux Foundation everyone came together andthen we figured out open core whereyou could fork it so there are ways andwe also learned them that it is not binary it's not like if you build open you can't have things closed we know that we can build closed on top of open I think the challenge now is thatyou know we are in the open source moment for verification in that what you know many you know people did important you know open source leaders did in the late 90s is that they came together they said hold on a minute anyone now is saying everyone is saying they run open source you know thatterm is being used so loosely and this is history thatBrian Bellendorf you know knows well and taught me one of our advisors and and they he and many others saw that we have to come together and actually give a definition andthere was a definition that's already out there but people had the community had to come together andsay this is what's open source yes or no and then they were able to figure out how to institutionalize it and create governance around it now we're in that moment forverification where anyone now is increasingly starting to say oh we do verification but really what is verification how do you know that you know this verification for us I don't think it counts if it is not independently viewable of the operator because you cannot trust that verification process and so this is super you know important that right now we're in this moment where if we want to be able to trust what agents did we need to be able to see evidence butwe need to be able to understand the nature of that evidence and we need we have to be able to trust it and so we have to figure out how to define in this moment and I'm excited to talk with myself and my other panelists about this is that how do we define verifiability right now in the same way that open source leaders came together late 90s and you know it took that kind of messy landscape and was like gave a bit of order to make it publicly definable commercially viable andprocurable andlegally defensible we're in this moment now it's a little different and that open source was easier to define right it was like either yes or no you either met these conditions it was binary and you're open source now there's stages there's different types of verification they're self-verifiably there's mutual verification there's independently verifiable there's cryptographically verifiable there's centralized means to do cryptographic verifications there's decentralized means so we have to as a community come together now in this moment and this is why at the advanced AI society we've launched you know I'm excited we most often were talking about this of like the beauty of Asara whichI taught me that the word means essence the essence and Arabic oh sobeautiful and so what we're doing at the society is called the proof of control architecture whichis the technical foundations for verifiable AI to be able to tell what how do you confirm an AI did what it was supposed to do and the purpose of this architecture is that we have to be able to find this in a way that makes sense for what Sarah is talking aboutwhich is that you know right now we have the messy part of finger at how do we use AI post-appointment and this is this is why we're in the time of AI governance this is why AI policy is soimportant because we have to figure out how do we actually trust these things if we're gonna make AI inclusive like you know I was saying right is thatwe have to develop governance around it of how do you combine different AI models or how do you figure out these like tricky questions of privacy andprotection and I know we can do this because we've done this before we give power we we trust agents all the time like when you get on a plane I don't know how many people came on a plane here but we have developed systems of trust and verification to entrust someone else to be an agent on my behalf every time I get on a plane there's already been I think a sort of you know like whatever certification training process thatthe whole industry has gone through and then if something fails there's accountability there's insurance mechanisms there's a way that the industry has price risk andwe have not done any of that yet it is literally being figured out right now so I think a lot of times you were very critical of AI being like oh it like the industry hasn't figured out itself itself up butlike things are moving quickly and we are you know figuring things out right now we are you know unfortunately flying the plane and you know trying to build it at the same time I'm not saying it's right but it explains I think some of the messiness and we should be realistic to say look we haven't figured out the messy and kind of boring stuff around procurement around actuarial science around this you know how do we price risk andgetting the insurance industry you know withall these agreements and governance and nation-states involved soI think it really makes sense right now wherewe're at butyou know really figure out safety we have to agree on verification and we have to agree on what open verification looks like otherwise everyone's just going to claim it and we're not going to get any farther along withhow do we actually trust that an agent acted on my behalf. Thank you somuch andI guess it doesn't harm to repeat some things that are obvious and I think that all of you being here you're making the case for open source so thanks so much for that. Turning back to David andagain Tricia something else thatyou were saying is that again you are always the conversation is always about what AI should do rather than what AI is right now soit pains me a bit to us this to David but based on what we're discussing what do you think talking aboutan agent-based systems and what do you think are the main challenges on a I would say medium term over the next five years that again it's an entire different geological era in terms of AI butwhat do you think are the main challenges that it was. Yeah well I'm going to I'm going to slightly reframe thatI'll talk challenges and opportunity right. The main challenges that we're facing one of them is a concentration of know how there are maybe a couple of thousand people in the world WHO know how the most advanced systems work andmost of them have been captured by eight companies and so what can we do to sort of bring more skill andknowledge to a greater array of people away from that concentration of know how more broadly one of the big challenges is we have a hyper concentration of intelligence capital in in the hyperscalers right sotoday as of close of market yesterday they were worth about twenty five trillion dollars us by twenty thirty three my forecast is they're going to be somewhere between fifty two trillion and eighty trillion dollars of market capitalization and andso how can we sort of pull out more value for more people rather than have it be in the handful of a few oligarchs andand so sovereign AI is I think part of the answer to thatand and so I'm very excited this is in the opportunity space of how can we bring more people working on sovereign AI out to those hundred ninety three countries and and unlock the intelligence of entire populations of entire countries soIndia for example is acutely aware of this right India rode the outsourcing boom and and did very well off of thatand now is facing the outsourcing collapse and from the federal government down to the individual states is making a concerted effort to retool the economy around intelligence Pakistan also my my former student a doctor so whole monier is is chairing the national AI council asthey try and reorient the entire economy around intelligence in fact fifty countries at least thatwere tracking are building sovereign AI initiatives from Sweden to Singapore andmore should be getting in on the act and in one of the promises of sovereign AI is that you can have the intelligence of a population instead of all that know how and knowledge and and that that increase in economics that I talked about going into the hands of you know an individual hyperscaler magnificent seven plus one it'll now go into the hands of the people andthat's a really exciting opportunity as we conclude let's go rapid fire I want to add one opportunity is that I think in order as a as a mechanism to get to this world that you've outlined David is that there we have to get over the opportunity in the challenge is we have to get over this mindset that you primarily use only hyperscalers butI also think on the other end all these kind of responsible AI andethical AI critiques of hyperscalers to tell everyone to get off of them and that they're bad and evil I don't think that works either I don't think you can penalize people for wanting to use tools thatjust work you know I'm sure you don't have enough transparency but you can't shame people andso one way to get people there and I think it's a mindset shift is that we're missing the kind of design mechanisms that we're implementing at advanced AI society is that it's we talk about this concept of a portfolio AI approach and in the same way that you would approach your financial portfolio as you know you don't put all your eggs in one basket andjust like one company well what's exciting about companies now they're coming up and that's why I've been looking at you know so excited when I saw Sarah was on my panel is thatI think companies like hers andyou're going to see more is that we're now past finally okay we know there's the frontier AI lab andhyperscalers but there's actually so many more companies you know partially because you know open source has allowed this but a lot of great entrepreneurs are starting to come up where they're making all these other companies for us to choose from so that we can take a portfolio AI approach and we can say hey based on as a nation state or as an individual or as a company based on my data needs my regulatory needs you know what my use case is what my purpose is what is the best portfolio for us in this business context or in my daily life or use case and how does thatchange and we're going to see a lot more different kinds of AI applications it's going to you know look more inclusive people are going to be mixing models and so I think we need to really move out of this kind of like shame based idea because that's not going to work intosaying you know there's all these companies like Sarah's and others that are coming companies in China thatwe're just going to be able to choose from around the world andeveryone's going to have more choices thank you so much we're almost a time but I wanted to check with the panelists if someone is up quick some job oh good I just loved it everyone's at the ready all right I'm so sorry just just want to highlight one thing here that actually when you architect this new era of agent decay AI is you have to have cyber security in your mind software development in your mind and architecture and also cryptography at the core of everything thatyou do if we don't get that right from the very beginning I don't think we'll be able to get another chance at this for another 30 40 years I was just I was really commenting on everyone I had their finger at the ready I'll only say this honestly gatherings like this were very depressing a few years ago most of the conversation was around oh open source should focus on evals which was absurd the conversation is entirely different so the mechanisms by which we can own intelligence have dramatically changed part of that is a shift at the rate of return or compute but part of it's aswell we're starting to automate AI training itself and AI optimization which means barriers to entry are totally different and I think that's the main reason there's so much momentum in this room and it's a totally different environment from even a few years ago soit's the right time forthis forum andDavid go for it yeah very quickly since open source was pioneered let's argue in the 1980s consistently what we've seen is on the one hand people are always going to be paying for state of the art models that are closed source expensive ones at the top of the pyramid open source brings in more access andallows more people to take advantage of the benefits of technology and it's important that we continue that work since today's discussion is in about open source and also in this United Nations building so I want to say today actually if you look at the overall different countries the computation installation 90% of them might be already out of date to support the latest model sothe goal forthe open compute with the open source is we want the AI agent system can run on most of the computation resources which today might already underutilized thatmeans that we want to use those underutilized resource deployed in the data center to support the AI and also AI agent system so that we can have the chance to let the grow the whole global different country developing country they can benefit for that actually in the past one year we work together with the United Nations and also the Africa Union to try to try that this open compute for AI education for talent and we provided this underutilized butfree resource as the online resources support the Africa universities they can launch the classes to teach their students so that's very meaningful for them to get our next generation ready forAI soI think open source and open compute is very important forus to consider how to expand the AI capacity and make AI inclusive thank you thank you somuch I know we are running out of time but just checking the room I wish that the Q&A was slightly longer butthat's the time we have we have time for one or two questions if someone wants to take the floor please press on the mic I should be able to see the light andsee if I see any I see one over there so my question is primarily around open me I can't ask you to introduce yourself sure thank you sure my name is Berza big and I am from Kindrel my question is primarily around open hardware right it's it's really great to hear aboutcryptography on this forum andyou know we've been talking about software quite a lot I would like to hear aboutopen cloud open hardware and what kind of open stack is available out there andwhat what the committees are thinking aboutit thank you so much any other intervention I'm trying I'm seeing let's go to my right thank you somuch for a wonderful session my name is Habib Nurbay I work as a professor back home in South Africa and in the context of research methodology a lot of the data that we use if for example it is not valid we would not classify it asreliable so in the context of open source data my question would be around the fact that if the data is accessible if it's open and even if it is very fireable how do we ensure thatthe data that we having access to in the open source context would still be valid or reliable in a similar context to research methodology thank you I think we might have time I see forlast one myself Rajshaker I work for a company called Prezenius which is health care plus medtech company my question is regarding it's open source AI right so but more and more countries are going in the direction of data residency butwhen you talk aboutopen source AI forAI the bedrock is the data when countries are going in the direction of data residency how you guys want to or at least I would like to get an opinion of the panel how it works. Thank you so much Trisha volunteered I think for open hardware question I can take the first one just to give you soto answer the question of what's happening with open source or verify verify ability with hardware is that there is a lot happening right now and it's a great time forcryptographic work that's andone of the things that we're seeing with verifiable AI some of our members is thatyou can now do especially for sovereign AI or any sovereign AI needs is you can do provable compliance sothis is a great time for you know governance forpolicymakers for anyone WHO's trying to figure out how do you figure out where you are in the compute you know in your queue for trying to get compute how do you prove that your data was residents in this specific geography how do you even prove thatyour data was computed onto this very chip right and so we have members from Lucid to equity WHO have or figuring this out we can build out the entire data supply chain andyou can track you know cryptographically just tamper resistant and you can check it's independent of them you can confirm thatthis data was computed here and on this hardware so I think there's a lot that's happening in thatin that area in terms of the intersection of hardware andsoftware sothat's one example and may I ever more comment actually today the software stats already there called the flat OS actually it is built together with tens of different research institutes or university and also the enterprises together it already can support the more than thirty three zero different type of hardware and we also collaborate with the open source community like the Linux Foundation PyTorch Foundation Eclipse Foundation this together so today I thank this for the open computer open hardware I think we are ready thank you I don't know if someone else wants to come in fromthe pound so the last questions the answer is you can't there's just no way and just to add to that I don't know if you noticed butthe US issued an order that says we don't care if your data is resident in your country if it's operating on cloud run by a US company we can look at it that's a problem sohow how we work forward fromhere is really messy and and the data ownership data flow data providence question is one thatwe all need to work on but I'm not going to even pretend that people have begun to solve it because it just got a lot messier this brings our panel to an end thank you so much to all of you for being here and to the panelists for the great presentation we wish you all the best for the rest of the week we have a fantastic program great receptions and the UN conversation on AI will also continue not only New York butin Geneva withthe first AI dialogue that will take place on the sixth and seventh of July andI want to acknowledge the Estonian minister and in the room Estonian and El Salvador are leading the efforts of the first dialogue on AI governance and open source will be part of that conversation as well thank you all and on to the fantastic you can see pet peeve to transition to the next session. Thank you somuch I love whenever we're doing tech events and then there's technical issues I think it's quite ironic thank you Felipe for finishing us off on time that's a miracle whenever you attend UN events we're going to start off in a minute or two with a very exciting closing session solet me hand it over to our dear colleague Medi again and you saw him earlier he graciously stepped into moderator previous panel and he'll be back on stage to introduce the speakers of the closing session so over to you Medi. colleagues, guests I'm very happy to wrap up this open source first open source and AI day at the UN and we'll be discussing in very formal chat and formal chat with first the U. S. A. M. and Deep Gill the enders in general especially my wife for digital and music technology Mr. Alberto Gaggio the director general of the Spanish agency for the supervision of artificial intelligence is here and her excellency Lizzie la Pacosta no Lizzie la Pacosta minister of justice anddigital affairs from the Republic of Estonia sorry if I'm misspelled any of your names so I invite you all to join me on the discussion microphone are not working so we are getting the discussion in a very formal setting for a very informal discussion while waiting for the speakers will make it very short it will not be a very long discussion okay and I forget in early session. and I forget in her excellency Gabriela Gonzalez the dpr of Uruguay very sorry I'm using all notes I need to update I just need to start using Google Docs or whatever I mean things that get updated automatically so today we got a various sessions all along with today we've been talking aboutrobots we've been talking aboutthe future of AI with the opening keynotes we've also discussed the the development of AI and then we got a first of kind panel with only women minister showing us the pathway on how to develop the deal in real way in effective manner the three of them are very excellent and bringing some concrete results in their country withvery impactful tangible outcomes and we discussed the robot we discussed the agent andall these very complex and technical subjects now we'd like to wrap up this discussion with some very insightful outcomes fromall of you andthen I'll start with a very simple question forall of you whenfirst you heard about open source in AI what is the the immediate things thatyou are thinking aboutI'll start with our Spanish colleague please open source and AI in few words for you so up to me it's openness and transparency and I think those are two major values thatwe need to to include in our development of AI and I also like the previous speaker also said thatthere's nothing wrong withcompanies trying to look forthe own economic benefits butthere is also nothing wrong to ensure that these economic benefits are also supported by transparency andresponsible development of technology that protects the rights of people.

Boss please, you are so very quickly for me it is the usability the reusability and the community dimension that you know you have a community that has your your back.

Your Excellency. Thank you I fully agree what has already been said from Estonian side I would add thatit is a governance issue it's not a technical issue open source is something thatyou have to put on the table asa default solution from the governance side then only then you can fulfill all the values and goals you are looking for. Thank you.

Thank you so much for giving me the floor. For us I'm gonna repeat also what is being said by the previous speaker Madam Minister and the USG. For us it's only not only a technical principle it's a strategic tool fortrust inclusion innovation andinternational cooperation and also open standard open technologies andcollaborative governance that can help reach digital divide across the countries and region from developing and then developing countries also. Thank you. Thank you somuch andI'll stay with that the bridging the gap I know how how involved you are in in thatmaking sure that no country is left behind there is a bigger force on the middle outer level the global digital compact the back of the future the the global dialogue the the panel there is a lot of efforts happening at the UN from a member state perspective do you think at the thatopen source is getting enough space how you see it that think should be enforced within the multilateral either within the multilateral or how the multilateral could enforce the open source well it's never enough what we can do to get bridges between regions and using the open sources but I think with the work that the audit is doing is it's good we are going to the good path of course we can improve butfor that we need many mandate we need also support the offices you know we have to create also the tools in our own governance at the UN forimproving our work withthe withus the member state butindeed is is needed and I think we are in the right way here working with the multilateral system. Thank you so much UAG about the multi-larand you see it's your audit was cited what do you think or that can do more? Well get the tech to work better always in the room withour colleagues fromOICT but I think today has been a good day a kind of the quality of the discussions the some of the new topics thathave come in robotics forexample and the fact thatwe didn't lead with the policy heavy agenda we allowed the community to surface its own insights its own concerns the community of technologies so in a sense we successfully close the gap between some of these high-level considerations andmultilateral forums andwhat is happening on the ground in terms of the work of the people actually building those systems soI think thatis the big lesson formultilateral forums at a time of rapid change and questions about value add that we need to kind of bridge that gap between the abstract and the

practical soyou know you saw with the turnout today very strong member state turnout in the morning we had a panel with three women ministers leading the digital transformation in the countries Jamaica Morocco andSierra Leone sothat tells you something about the potential the energy of this week andwe had the keynote fromJan Lecun WHOI thought you know gave us a lot of food forthought in terms of what's the direction of the technology the different angles this trajectory could take and a very powerful lesson was thatwe should have hope that things could default to the small the smart andthe distributed way of doing things something that the open source community knows quite well andI totally agree withthe distinguished ambassador fromUruguay about the need foropen standards open infrastructure collaboration to be catalyzed through more targeted work clear mandates and adequate resources for the UN system. Thank you so much Susie so let's see I mean at the at the multilateral level we need andit's clear thatmore effort is needed but what's at member state level yeah I would say it the same member states need interoperability within the technological world and thatmeans open standards andthat means open source soit's simple as this in Estonia we have have had a fully digital state already from1990s andwe know very well from our experiences that the system we have based on X-road thatis an open source of course that the interoperability allows us to go further on withwhatever AI solutions but we have to be not vendor-locked and thatis important forevery other country aswell becausewe are a small country but whatever country in the world needs this interoperability andopen standards and let me give you just one example in Estonia we have e-voting we just celebrated 20 years of that so national voting andlocal voting is based on the technological possibilities and even this is basically open source audited by international independent auditors andthat shows the possibilities we have with open source and open standards thank you thank you so much Mr. Rabezo we discussed about the open source member states multilateral UN butat the end we need to implement thaton the ground and I know that you are leading a big effort in Spain or around that what does it really mean finally concretely to bring thaton the ground you think let me also compliment the previous speakers butI think the first of all is that open source it's a public policy or it needs to be a public policy member states whenwe are developing technology that it's basically serving the interest of our ministries forexample we need to do thatin cooperation with open source communities because that's the way to bring back control to what is happening internally digitally speaking and then we need also to ensure that the let's say the the public sector is also putting forward resources forthese technological communities to get together and to create more things andone example of what we have done in Spain we have created our own AI model which is a train with almost 20 percent of data in Spanish in order to counterbalance the let's say the the power thatit has commercial models frombig tech companies thatare mainly trained in in in English sothis way we are able to somehow also reflect the values reflect the history reflect the nuances of our language whichis Spanish and it's also spoken across across the world by 700 million people so it's also encouraging member states or states to put forward the resources that can help these communities create more AI system and then if you if you allow me I think I need to commend the work thatthe we know thatis doing on on this open source and bringing international community on open source here because you guys matter what you have to say matters very much to the multilateral system andto the international discussions that we are having we are I mentioned in a previous in a member's intervention we are gathering in Geneva about the global governance of AI while you have to say here needs to be also translated intowhat member states discuss into what ministers discuss andheads of the government andof the state andit's important thatwe do know thatwe close the graph the the gap thatwe build bridges andthis is a great world that you are doing and needs to be to need needs to continue thank you somuch sowe heard about these different experience I'm looking at the Uruguay experience is this very siloed approach it sounds like very siloed approach every country bring their own experience in building that how the Uruguay is building experience is there any digital cooperation thatis framing that experience building up on on on that building open source inside of the digital transformation digital cooperation how it's being framed in orbit sorry and first of all cooperation is always necessary that's it's an umbrella that we have to work withbetween member state andalso withthe civil society with the all the companies with the private sector socooperation is not only needed inside the government and with other member state withyou here it's very important thatit has to be back on forward and feedback because we can we have to talk aboutan ecosystem andnot about isolated a member state isolate now have no sense because at the end what we want is the benefit of our population development more resources more connections and technologies and emerging technologies AI andthat are a challenge forus especially if I'm speaking fromthe from the global south a token in national capacity asUruguay we have create an agency to deal with this matter that is dealing withdigital agenda that include digital government open government cybersecurity data governance digital citizenship national strategies on AI data and cyber security we also understand thatdigital transformation is not a journey that countries should undertake alone but as I said before you will have sought to share this experience with international cooperation including south south and triangular cooperation in this regard we participate also with our agency of cooperation itself in initiatives such as agreement between Uruguay the Dominican Republic andSpain financed by the European Union which support the creation of the ICT of servitor in the Dominican Republic the strength of Uruguay unobservatory drawing on the Spain digital development experience we also work withthe our agency with NDP supporting implementation of the digital transformation of our government our state reflecting the important of the partnership between national institution international institution cooperation agency andthe united nation system andthis experience show our openness that openness is not only a principle it's not a map of of cooperation andI don't want to steal that I want to speak but thatis our more or less a genuine idea thatour how we are working and our conception of cooperation in this area thank you this sounds very inspiring forthe andthen for the global digital compact andthe digital cooperation work we are leading hope that this is a good example to be taken intoconsideration andshowcases becausefrankly this is the first time I hear aboutthat work you are doing sounds very great solet me look at my colleague from Spain you heard about the cooperation of their way on on that so that's it's coming it's being implemented the digital cooperation it's clearly the path for for accelerating the uptake of the digital transformations andAI is the open source also what beyond the digital cooperation a catalyzer for the digital cooperation absolutely I mean the model I just mentioned is open source it's available to everyone you can download it you can improve it you can upload it again with your improvements you can specialize it in different sectors this is something that we need to get the communities to work on because it's it's a public interest it's value for everybody in particular Spain has been working withwith all the American countries in order to ensure that because you see Spanish has very very many variants the Spanish of what Uruguay is not the same as the Spanish of Spain or the Spain or the Portuguese of Portugal is not the same asthe Portuguese of Brazil so what we're trying to do is to ensure that the mothers that the system they can somehow build on our history on our tradition on our nuances of the languages butalso what we are trying that we need to go to the to the concrete level of the problems that that people have in their daily lives meaning restaurants meaning shops if how they are adopting AI how they can create AI systems and this the open source community can bring a lot of value into it and at the international level as well if you allow me it's it's also important thatthere is more andmore cooperation between countries thatthe UN serves asa meeting point forall of us forexample Spain has supported they will know thatin the creation of the laboratory call AI governance forhumanity that is working on a number of areas for the global dialogue on AI butit can do much more it can go into concrete solutions forcountries that they don't maybe don't have compute capacity or maybe they they need extra extra support andthen this can be somehow an enabler of creating more AI systems that solve real challenges of countries Thank you so much before going to USG I'd like to question the minister studying minister on you've been citing the X-road project one of the most famous project in Europe whenit comes to the data I changed and it was replicated across Europe and then at some point it was even a question of upscaling it at the European level I know the challenges you face on terms of data we are talking aboutAI butdata AI with no data there is no no real discussion so open data was one of the light motif of building the X-road I'd like to hear about all the bottlenecks more mostly on bottlenecks issues that you can see happening now thatwe are moving intothe AI era withthe data exchange whichbringing a lot more value into the data how do you think the future of the AI X-roads? Okay yeah X-road is an excellent extremely cyber secure way of data interoperability andit is perfectly suitable for AI solutions because it has not only like a pipeline between different databases but it includes computing capacity within this pipeline andEstonia uses already more than 200 government services based on AI butyou asked aboutbottlenecks andwe have always been very open about the mistakes we have been doing throughout this long story so if anybody is interested in mistakes then you can just ask Estonia and you get good lessons from us. So one of the lessons was that we have actually stopped using all the sensitive data before the sovereign solutions withAI because the data protection comes somuch important andturns to be the absolute most important point that there should be no bactors the fools of rain solutions for the sensitive data. The second lesson learned is something I think we face all together andthis is thatin the democratic countries wherewe value very sincerely the rights of authors abouttheir history books and whatever other information we actually see for example the Russian bots spreading very intensively the false information and the propaganda to all the LLMs so we are we all democratic countries are facing a situation where the bad guys are filling the AI systems withthe propaganda and false information that might affect younger generations on a totally wrong way andthe good countries WHO are protecting the offers rights andall these kind of things whichare very important so the LLMs are closed. I was listening withall the pleasure the Spanish example aboutyour history and culture. If we can't find together good ways to fill in the LLMs andthe systems with accurate information about cultures histories andnarratives identities andagain about histories then we are losing our values we are losing our most sacred feelings andunderstandings to the bad guys andthroughout the history this data falsification has always been used to prepare the great wars sothis is one of the lessons learned that we have to act in a different way to feed the large language models with not only different languages but also the histories the cultures the sounds the voices the pictures the colors of each cultures and and this is one of the reasons we very highly appreciate the work thatyou are doing at the United Nations becausethis is the very right and timely way to operate but sorry now I had such a negative information you asked about bottlenecks maybe I will end witha positive note sobecause we are so widely using open source in Estonia we have been able to first to protect our cyber our cyber security is extremely strong and this is becauseof open source this is one of the values and the second thing is we have been we have had the possibility to export andupscale our solutions to 140 countries so 140 countries in the world use the governments use some at least some components of our open source sothis is really thatwe are very proud of thank you thank you so much very insightful you heard there's a multilateral happening at the small scale how to take their upscale it at larger scale andensure that no country is left behind when it comes to this global digital cooperation

I think the global digital compact called for these partnerships this network multilateralism and it's interesting the examples thatwere mentioned so in the old days we used to call them south south andtriangular cooperation south south north you know Spain,Uruguay Dominican Republic and others the digital and emerging technologies turn is making such partnerships more interesting and more possible soa concept fromthe past is a re is being reborn in a good way withthis technological turn and that's why you know some of the other examples you could think of you know Estonia's X-road it traveled through the technical community to a much larger setting whichwas India so the data exchange layer in the India stack is inspired by X-road and the carrier of thatwas the open source community the coding community so these kind of partnerships these unusual partnerships and sometimes you know some of this flows back

to the global north fromthe global south so those partnerships are becoming possible now they're encouraged by the global digital compact andI think for AI open source AI open development AI in particular they will be crucial because computers scarce it is locked up in a few geographies it's costly talent is also highly concentrated in a few places so countries whether they are rich or poor smaller big would have to network to be able to access compute to be able to develop their own talent and perhaps work together on data sets pool data sets share use cases if something has worked in Estonia can it work in another place if the Spanish supervisory agencies experience withstartups is instructive foranother country so these things can travel through these networked approaches andthe open source community can act as a conveyor belt between these different geographical centers thank you so much Susie yeah indeed there is a lot of to be done and hopefully we can fill in the gaps and then avoid when it comes to the AI avoid the same issue that we face it when it comes to the digital transformation I don't know of a lot of about the digital strategy of Uruguay but I heard that you are also collaborating withSpain andthe Dominican Republic so that is an international cooperation it looks like it's intothe DNA of the strategy digital strategy but the government strategy how does it impact the decision making process this design of the strategy what is the component of international cooperation thatis taken intoaccount while building all these national strategy meaning being under constraint of sovereignty being under constraints of lack of computing and all these things how this is taking intoconsideration that is a very wide question

but I can tell that the government we have a central role in a road to play we are not only a regulator or we collaborate with these ecosystems public investors the standards center andmajor user of technology throughprocurement public policy international partnership as you mentioned government can steer innovation to work their public interest this shows that the openness is not only aboutsharing technology butalso sharing knowledge institutional models and lesson learn in the case of Uruguay becauseeverything is connected andI know many of you are from private sector unfortunately I only see on you open sources AI or something like that next time we should know better WHOI all of you in order to also interact better but for example in the case of of Uruguay we export services we work we have a very very small country in the south for those WHO doesn't know between Argentina and Brazil and our trade is based on Maine on food but also we export services to a rounder world and especially to the US so we have to collaborate withthe private sector created the infrastructure and the cooperation in order also to have the capacity building assistant to improve that sector everything is connected we have a role to play as government to give the regulations inside the government but also collaborate withour partners in the region but also we can we since we have developed for the last 30 years a good private sector taking the hand of the government both together we can export this model in the region sofor that and even in the south we have different stage of development in this area sosometimes even we are not sodeveloped as European Union countries or in the level thatEstonia it is we can also share our experience with countries like the Dominican Republic also we want to do it with countries in Africa to start to do inter-regional cooperation butfor that we also need partners like could be members day like Spain could be the UN system itself we also have a lot of cooperation with European countries even with the EU asitself butalso withdifferent members so I think we are doing we try to do not just within general withall the technologies with the whole umbrella all the merchant technologies and including AI of course and of course regulation also the trying to have an international regulation of the cyber space taking account with the excellent mention before the bad use of these technologies thank you thank you so much that's very insightful and very very impressive whether you've been saying on this openness from the way on Africa the Caribbean origin South America butI think thatalso the notion of south is a little bit moving fromthe geographical definition seeing some of the north country coming to the south because when it comes to the AI they are very delayed and then we will welcome them at the south in the definition but that's that's uh that's very very impressive to see how the digital cooperation is a strong part of I want to add some please it about what you mentioned developing countries we must ensure that we are not merely a consumer of digital technology but also active participants and contributor andconcrete digital of digital solutions even we we know that not the main contribution andthe main countries involved companies involved when AI are not a cup I think with my fingers I can't count we also we are we can collaborate andthe partnership withthose countries too yeah yeah we need to start building that indeed it's uh it's an imperative we will be only consumer what we consider today as very scarce and very available like the AI probably will be more much rare in the future and it will be the access will be very limited to all the developed countries andthen we should not reach thatpoint um from the we get back to Estonia because I know how advanced it and then beyond the extra there many there have been many attempts also into building the DPI stack building the open AI there's a lot of uh listens to be learned from the Estonian experience the EVO I remember whenfirst it was launched and then all what opened it behind it meaning the the ID andall these elements andthe security and the cyber security if we we need to pack the the the stack or the the thatvision and make it open if we take the the experience of Estonian say oh let's make it open source what does it require what does it need how how to take it forwords but also how to bring um member states to adopt this kind of approach or your solution or the way you have designed your solution thank you as I said in the beginning I truly think it's we are talking about the governance is you're not the technological issue so and that is where the agreement to find the common space between the member states is the work that United Nations can help us all to find the common ground on that and also to understand that open source is very much not to be vendor locked what you very rightly said fromUruguay thatthat really our we have a lot of countries that are not extremely rich we have to serve our people in the best way andthis is globally extremely important thatnobody is left behind and that we all have the opportunities to use the artificial intelligence forthe good of the people otherwise the speed is sohigh that there would be a total loss if we can't solve this issue soit is very very important thatwe find a common ground here and open source is definitely useful for every company actually WHO does it so this is something I think we can learn fromEstonia becauseEstonian digital path has been built knowingly from the very beginning already from1990s on the open source that has been our political decision throughout the governments that open source is the solution by default this is a political decision if we can have this decision spread andmade a little bit better example for public procurement in all the member states then we have a solid ground not to have a vendor lock andthat already means that we have a solid ground forinteroperability of whatever services whatever companies producing so it is economically good for the business side actually to go on with the open source so that is our lesson because of open source you have a possibility to export to upscale thank you for this wonderful example from India on the X-road this is exactly the example if you use open source you can upscale from a country with1.3 million inhabitants to your country which is slightly bigger so so this is the economical benefit that is there of course we are all we all understand the social benefit the political benefit etc butthere is a clear economical benefit as well thank you thank you so much Alberto just a kind of technical question I know how Spain was behind the AU AI Act then stronger in building data that that framework what is the part of the open source in the AU AI Act butwhat meaning the audience would be curious to know aboutthat and me too yeah no foreveryone to know the the AU AI Act took for the political agreement 36 hours 100 people in one single room in order to agree on all the obligations of the of the regulation andand I was lucky to be there withmy secretary of state in that moment Carmatidas WHO then came to be one of the corporate coaches of the UN high level advisory board andon the regulation I I would like I mean since you are putting forward this I believe there is a message that I would like everyone to take home andits regulation doesn't stop innovation andthis is something that is important if you do regulation properly innovation doesn't need to stop and what we did in the regulate in the AU AI Act it was not to regulate AI it was to regulate the uses of AI that significantly impact on the fundamental rights of people or on the security of people or on the health of people andin that regard what we finally regulated is 10 15 percent of all of the AU systems thatare put in the european market which is a very targeted regulation and we believe it's it's it's very it's a very powerful one andwhen you come into the open source open source in general is excluded fromfrom fromthe regulation aslong as you don't put it in the market so why is it excluded whenyou put it on on hugging face on github because there is transparency possibilities there is a auditability possibilities to do on those on the weights on the model on the on how the system was is operating and that is giving this extra let's say transparency or this extra support in order forpeople to be able to to work withsomething thatit's that it's truly open no then another thing is whenyou create thatas a solution and then you place it in the market and then that is actually affecting individuals then in my if it's in a high risk sector it the obligations will apply will start applying butbecause there is so much transparency you will understand better how to construct the AI system once you put it intodeployment becausethe problem and this is another problem thatwe see is thatfor example withmodels with this the big models that are now available to what extent can we ensure that there is no bias in how the data how the model was trained was training was was training withthat data so if you don't have access to that information how are you ensuring thatyour system does don't does not discriminate so this is an important in an important aspect thatwe thatwe look into when we regulated AI in Europe andwe believe thatopen source it helps bring this problem to a lesser extent thanks so much because we we don't have a lot of time medicine I'll go for a very quick question yeah I see very quick question you're sorry I'll give you the final the final question sofor you for for your Excellency on the final words regarding what is the openness what how these openness you what is your your perceptions of the openness in in the in the lens of the AI anddigital and digital transformation and if you can give us a closing sentence of thoughts regarding that

another thatjust referred to AI in general open source forus asI'm speaking now from the national perspective fromthe south andyou asked me from 37 earlier well I'm not going to speak on the whole on behalf of all of them butfrom us butI see fromour perspective from the south openness is not enough it's not accompanied by capacity building investment cyber security data readiness complete capacity financing andprivate andprivate cooperation as I mentioned at the beginning of this closing remark government have a central role asregulator investor and the standard center the consistent building andusing of the technology but if you allow me one minute more the three closing messages thatI would like to share withyou it's also that first openness can democratize the digital transformation secondly must be grounded in trust security human right and responsible governance andthird that you have also asked me earlier openness required cooperation no country or sector can build the digital future alone not even the UN or a country or a region or a political system that you we need to work all together the goal is to move from a fragmented digital solution to share ecosystem fromthe present fromour perspective fromdependency to capacity from digital divide to digital cooperation openness should be the pathway to share progress ensuring innovation became a force of development dignity and opportunity for all of us thank you very powerful thank you so much very powerful message or you know whether we are taking with us after the session minister wait if we the same question or regarding the openness I mean we started withwhat is open in AI or open AI and what is the openness

openness is a ground fortrust and without trust the digital world democratic digital world is not possible soeverything has to be grounded related built on trust and that is again a governance issue andtrust is needed soobviously thateven when I'm usually against bureaucracy I fully agree with my Spanish colleague thatyou need some kind of regulations to build trust and then you can build a lot of innovation on these regulations because if we share some of the regulations then you can build whatever innovation on thatand this is again one of the issues wherewe trust united nations to build trustable agreements at least agreements where the innovation can be built on andopenness is somuch related with trust it allows controllability it allows interoperability I fully agree what my colleague fromUlga said butthe center focal point is trust and trust with the AI issues and it's moving so fast we have to act much more faster thank you thank you so much well deserved of course there are better in 30 seconds okay it's trust on people but it's also legal certainty forinnovators andthat is very important because you know what is going to happen if something works wrong becausethere are rules and then you you can rely on those rules so legal certainty it's super important in order to make your commercial offer really viable andreally scalable andI think this is what regulations like the AI Act and the work that Estonia andSpain we are doing also in making AI responsible is so important to be based on those to be less trust and legal certainty for innovators thank you so much

UAG you heard aboutall the calls forthe UN I will let you close this session and close the day please thank you there's a few words between you andthe reception I think I agree with whatever has been said there's not much I can add there I think the call foraction for us is to ensure inclusion in our own processes work very hard forthat andthen promote openness which leads to trust trust which would hopefully lead to adoption and applications and hopefully those applications would be done in a way in a well-governed way so that they lead to impact forthe maximum number of people on this planet positive impact so thank you for a wonderful wonderful day today thank you foryour presence here and looking forward to seeing you at the reception

thank you very much andsee the microphone works again I think it's because the USG said we have to fix it sothank you very much forthe whole day socan we do our round of applause for the audience for sticking throughthe whole day it's not easy in these windowless rooms so as was mentioned by USG there's a reception that will be on the fourth floor unfortunately there's limited capacity so please check your badge if there's a sticker you'll have priority so please make your way to the fourth floor and then see you there thank you
