---
title: "k1i-k1i8jasxz4-English"
source: "k1i-k1i8jasxz4-English.txt"
generated_by: normalize_captions.py
format: simplified transcript
---

# k1i-k1i8jasxz4-English

> This is a simplified Markdown transcript generated from cleaned captions.
> Timestamps were removed. Speaker attribution is not inferred unless added in a later review pass.

## Transcript

Dear friends, colleagues and members of the open source community, welcome to the UN headquarter, welcome to the UN open source week, we're very happy, we're very glad to see you all again,we're thrilled to welcome you,this is a five day event where we come together to celebrate and promote the values of open source. Openness, collaboration, shared innovations is at the heart of open source as you all know andat the heart of the values of some of the values that UN is promoting globally. Open source, digital public good, digital public infrastructure are foundational in our digital world, so we all here coming together to celebrate that. The best thing about open source as, and you know that, that everybody can contribute, but the worst thing about open source is that everyone can contribute. So we're very happy,we're very happy of the diversity we have here you're coming from over 40 countries and that what makes this event very special and makes us very happy to welcome you here today. As you know, this week is about the people, the people WHO believe that code should be shared, ideas should be open and bugs, someone else's problem, right? So on Monday and Tuesday, we had an action packed innovation heavy two days. I recognize some of the, of the, of the organizers here and some of the participants. We had this Edithathon,Menteathon andHackathon,very successful and we are very happy with the, some incredible solution that we got and we had people improve widely used tool by our colleagues of UNICEF and we got some incredible solutions. Twenty two teams, yeah, came also from all over WHO worked on that. And those three things, Menteathon, Hackathon, they, they cover the three activities, the core pillars of digital transformation. So strengthening the open source infrastructure,the Menteathon safeguarding the integrity of information online,the Edithathon and fostering inclusive collaboration is the Hackathon. And today we kick off our third edition of OSPO, OSPO for Good. So this is our third year. Please raise your hand if you came in the first year. Please raise your hand if you came to the second year. Wow. Okay, this one is harder, raise your hand if you attended both. Oh, wow. Thank you. Thank you. So it was a very packed year for us here at the UN where we release our open source repository with, we release our open source catalog, we issued our common open source policy framework and more importantly, we issued the UN open source principles. Okay,last show of hand,WHO here is representing an organization that adopted the open source principles. Thank you. With that is my privilege to hand over to Mr. Menteep Singh Gill, the Undersecretary General andSpecial Envoy for Digital Immersion Technology to deliver conference opening remarks. Thank you, Omar, and thank you everyone for being with us today. It's an absolute pleasure. It's great to see throughthe show of hands and through your presence today how this event has grown over the past three years. You know, I remember our first moment together. It started as a small, intimate gathering of enthusiasts, open source enthusiasts. And it felt like a working session. And at thattime in parallel in this building,we were working on consultations for the Global Digital Compact across different regions, across different stakeholder communities. And then last year,when we gathered as a larger group of people focused on the growing role of open source program officers in governments andinstitutions around the world in parallel the negotiations on the Global Digital Compact had started. And today in 2025, as we meet at a larger scale, we are at a critical moment. The Global Digital Compact was adopted last year in September by the UN member states. And it's a milestone in how we look at international cooperation on digital and emerging technologies. And we didn't start from scratch because 20 years ago, we came together in Tunis at the World Summit on Information Society and adopted a defining document whose 20th anniversary we celebrate this year. And what we did withthe Global Digital Compact,what you all did with the Global Digital Compact is move to, let's say, the next version of the software for cooperation around digital and emerging technologies. These five objectives frombridging the digital divide and accelerating progress on the sustainable development goals,all the way to governing AI forhumanity that's an interlocking comprehensive modern agenda on digital and emerging technologies. The GDC also led to the establishment of the office,the Office forDigital and Emerging Technologies that I have to, I have the honor to lead at this point in time. And importantly fromour perspective asopen source enthusiasts it recognized the critical value thatopen source digital public goods and digital public infrastructure play in advancing and inclusive digital transformation and building an inclusive digital economy. So this year aswe celebrate the open source week we have a more comprehensive agenda. So a full week of programming reflects the diverse, powerful and growing role of open source in shaping digital cooperation and digital transformation. We started on Monday,so the past two days,in the UN deck over,participants from across the world came together to address critical challenges. You created new solutions,improved the reliability of information online and worked to ensure as Omar was saying,the foundational infrastructure of the digital world is maintain andstrengthen. So we saw the full cycle of open source in action, create, maintain, sustain. I won't take a moment to reflect on the incredible work,the dynamic moments that we witnessed in the same room through the maintenance on the editor on and the hacker on. So remarkable impact during the editor on the participants created six new articles and edited 234 existing ones,resulting in I'm told more than 30,000 edits all focused on topics related to the UN and its mission around digital and emerging technologies, a dedicated group of more than 37 editors contributed several thousand words and their collective efforts reached a global audience of nearly two million views. So the power of collaboration just over a day. Meanwhile the maintenance on brought together over 40 plus participants across 15 plus breakout sessions,diving deep intoopen source software andlife cycle fromlicensing and governance. These sessions were hands on andcollaboratively guided by senior maintainers and produced actionable insights on critical topics like AI andOSS,contributor recognition,fair labor and security. And then in the ahead of the storm hackathon 81 hackers took over the UN headquarters UN takeover to tackle three ambitious challenges proposed by our colleagues at UNICEF related to children and focused on climate and risk data. From forecasting extreme weather impacts on children to solving complex geo data puzzles to making risk data actionable throughgeo site innovations participants brought together creativity, collaboration and technical excellence to the forefront. The solutions developed during the hackathon will be used by UNICEF colleagues to advance their work on these critical challenges. So congratulations to the three winning teams. Your innovative solutions will make a powerful impact and will help drive real world change through UNICEF's mission. And then moving on fromtoday till the end of the week at the OSPO forgood we'll continue the dialogue that started three years ago. We'll dive intohow we can build more effective government OSPOs explore the dynamic relationship between open source andartificial intelligence anddiscuss how open source and DPIs can reinforce each other. And tomorrow on DPI Day,we will work to better connect the open source and DPI communities and ecosystems. We will help align initiatives at the global level andensure that DPI projects actively contribute to the implementation of the global digital compact. Now I will wrap up by showing how this community is connecting to the broader mission of the United Nations andthe Office forDigital and Emerging Technologies at a critical juncture when we are in the midst of a UN80 moment,reform,renewal rejuvenation on the 80th anniversary of the UN. So I will mention a couple of critical points. First the UN is not only a space for governments, it is a space for all stakeholders. We cannot reinvent ourselves if we do not move to this broader notion of multi-stakeholder collaboration. Our mission,therefore in the technology sector has two advanced inclusive multi-stakeholder cooperation that serves everyone. In the same spirit,the global digital compact is not only forgovernments it is a north star forall actors in the digital ecosystem,for everyone in this room,technologies policymakers and advocates. And open source is explicitly recognized in the digital compact,open AI models as well as open access to training data and compute resources. So this reflects a clear understanding by UN member states of open source as the foundation of digital transformation. All of you in this room can support this vision can support our mission of implementing the GDC. The GDC is open for endorsement by any stakeholder from civil society, to academia, to the private sector, to the developer community. Even individuals can endorse it. We invite you all to take part in it, go to the UN Global Digital Compact website and endorse the GDC and join this implementation community. So thank you. At the end of the day, this event is community driven. I think Omar and the team lost sight of what was happening around this week, and loss of control is a good thing. So we are having some moments of serendipity, of discovery, of connection. That is often hard to imagine in our crazy world. So thank you all. Many of you have traveled from different parts of the world, made the time, contributed your own resources to be here. Thank you to the panelists for contributing the available insights, the mentors of UN takeover, the moderators and the session organizers whose efforts have shaped such a rich and thoughtful program. Enjoy. Thank you. As mentioned, we had those very exciting two days where there was -- it wasn't in this -- second day was in this room, the first day was in the room, and there was a lot of action between 100 plus people WHO were creating things for us. So we have a short video, summarizing the two days, that we can start our panel. We have a lot of work to do. And how much time we sort of wasted, and how much I think that we learned. Thank you for all everybody WHO worked with two days with us here. So, now it's time for our first panel of the day. So the first panel is about how they did it, a look behind newly launched Ospos. We're very excited. There's a very special panel forus becausewe're going to have civil society academia private sector and government. Come and share with us some of their lessons learned, what worked, what didn't work. And forthat,I'm very happy to call on our moderator,Satikko Muto WHO's the chairwoman of the Open Forum Europe and senior researcher at the Research Institute of Sweden. Satikko. [ Applause ] >> Thank you, Omar, losing control can be a good thing, it's a good reminder. Especially since Omar,you just took my line about,you know I was going to ask the audience WHO was here two years ago and talk about the excitement of being here for a third time and, you know, there's also going to be a few other things. So there are,you know through a few sort of curve vaults to me at the end this morning. But, you know, losing control can be a good thing. That's a nice message. I want to thank Muto, Satikko, and Omar and everybody in the team also. I'm sure I'm not the first, nor the last WHO's going to do this, but, you know, putting together this event and collaborating with you guys over the last couple of years has been a real pleasure. And, you know, just let's do that instead. Round of applause. And it's not just this event, it's, I know that you are having, you know, a sustained effort towards promoting the adoption of open source across the UN system. And I think it makes a difference. And it's really with the global open source principles is also going beyond the UN system. And I think that's nice to see. So we,it's expanded to a week of events,but this conference,the Ospus for Good Conference that was the original event. And I've been asked a few times this week why we are calling it the Ospus for Good and not just the open source for good conference. And I think asthe Undersecretary and I was told this morning not to say his excellency that's another one,there's apparently,you know I thought I was doing the right thing but no,it's an Undersecretary General,Amadeep Gill,reminded us this morning that the idea was to sort of harness the excitement thatwe got fromthis conference but really thinking about what do we do starting Monday wheneverybody,you know is done taking the selfies and posting on LinkedIn and everything like that. How do we, you know, harness this excitement so that next year when we come back, we have some tangible results. And the way to do thatis throughthe institutionalization of open source practice throughan OSPO. That's not necessarily called an OSPO,although naming it something like thathelps withthe sort of collaborative aspects of, and the outward facing aspects of an OSPO. It makes it possible for newcomers to identify sort of a natural point of contact in order to learn from and to start a collaboration. So research carried out by colleagues at RISE,but also by the Linux Foundation for example it consistently shows that having such a construct is really key to translating some of the potential of open source and open collaboration into something tangible and sustainable. Again, having people WHO, it's their job on Monday to take the learnings from today and really make that work for their organization, but also potentially to make that work for the greater good. So, I think, you know, we kept the name OSPO for good, even though we're talking about all things open source, and that's, so that's key. I want to really hammer thathome,that it's not just about this high-level endorsements although those things are important,the political signaling is important it gives support to those people WHO have, as their day job, to further open source in the organization. But it's about learning how they actually did it. I've also had some comments about the title of the panel, but, you know, apparently that was, I hope we can deliver on that, anyway, how they did it, behind the scenes. Just again, before I invite my panelists on stage, something that the Undersecretary General Gil just mentioned about the global digital compact, it's about this need for a wider collaboration. And again,I think thatOSPO's thatstarted out in,sort of,in big inside big tech companies but now is also being established in education and increasingly in government. It's through these, OSPO's, that we can have a chance, I think, to truly collaborate, not just between governments, but between different stakeholders. And so,very pleased to introduce my panelists to the stage and maybe save the applause for you know, when everybody is on the stage, otherwise, I don't know what to come in with the next speaker. So, I'm going to present Sayid Shodari from Carnegie Mellon University, where he's the Associate Dean for Digital Infrastructure and Director of OSPO. Yes. Nithya, Nithya Ruff, Head of OSPO at Amazon. I have Bastian Gary, WHO is not sitting here. Yes, you're supposed to be over here. That's all right, yeah. Okay. Who's the head of the free software unit in the French inter-ministerial directorate for digital affairs, Dina for short. Yes. I have also Avni, Avni Khatri. It's not a completely accessible space. Avni. You can manage senior director education at GitHub. And finally,Richard Givers,Head of Service Design andDelivery Presidency of the Republic of South Africa. So,we have representatives fromOSPO's,from academia,government and the private sector. Now, I think we are meant to introduce a collaborative, interactive element. We have an audience poll. Yes, that's working. It's a very inspiring space,but it's not one that's easily,you know it doesn't necessarily open up for interaction, but we're going to try also with some questions from the floor at the end. Please think about what you want to ask and get ready while I get up on the stage. Thank you. [ Pause ] So, the question is about inspiration. It's about what you can learn from how others have set up in OSPO. And I'm going to have an introductory round where I'll ask the panelists just to give a short background on the origins of their OSPO, really focusing on sort of what was the motivating factors andalso maybe politically what sort of what was the winning argument what was,you know what were decision makers trying to achieve by establishing an OSPO. So, I'm going to start, and maybe then you can see here the audience thinks that, okay, it's about being inspired but also adapting to local conditions, a local context. So, see, if you start and we'll go in this direction, I'll just sort of, yeah. Thank you. Thank you, Sachiko, and thank you to the organizers of the event. It's really a privilege to be here. The origin story at Carnegie Mellon was that we realized software is an essential primary university result or output,and then it fosters the research,education and social impact mission of the university. The second realization is that the latest estimates are that 96% of all software has open source components in it, and that 80% is released as open source. So, if I ask a university researcher, do you care about open source software, they might say no,but if I ask do you care aboutresearch,education,and social impact,of course they'll say yes. So,making that connection was a key argument in realizing the value of open source software. It's also a realization that open source is playing a key role in newer forms of output to results of universities, such as open source hardware or open source AI. As Sachiko mentioned,the creation of the OSPO formalized our strategy and our implementation of open source within the university. We act as a community convener, a clearing house, a center of competency that allows us to better identify,manage,use,share,modify and reuse software to achieve our university mission and goals. This had the effect of activating the entire university,faculty,administrators students all the college divisions,administrative offices,research offices technology transfer. That has been incredibly important as we move forward in trying to build this community trying to build a culture,and trying to advance the work of the OSPO as it supports the university's mission. I would be remiss if I didn't mention that part of our origin story was a generous grant from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. And in fact, the Sloan Foundation has given multiple awards to U. S. University OSPO's, and we formed intoa network called the Consortium of University and Research Institution OSPO's. We now have our first members fromEurope aswell WHO are not directly funded by the Sloan Foundation. And as of yesterday, I'm told we have 25 members in this network. Several of my colleagues from the other university OSPO's are in attendance today. I would encourage you to reach out to them andask them abouttheir origin story as well. Thank you. Thank you, Said. I know we had a prep call and this -- one thing that Said you mentioned about this need to link your mission to the overall mission of the institution that you're working for is really important. That's something that you mentioned also, Nithya, but I'll let you introduce your work at Amazon OSPO. Thank you, Satikou, and thank you, Omar, and the United Nations for inviting us here. I lead the OSPO at Amazon, which includes all of Amazon, the AWS portion as well as our stores, devices, and other groups. And the OSPO at Amazon started back in early 2004,2007,when we realized that open source was such an important element of how we build innovation for our customers. And our customers wanted us to be more open source forward as well. And with all this in mind, we started the OSPO to first focus on the compliance side of things because most organizations are very focused on being law-abiding, complying with licenses, making sure that our builders know how to use open source and how to do it correctly. So that's how it got started. And then in 2017,we started another aspect of our open source program with the open source strategy and marketing team. And that team's job was to engage with open source communities, to contribute back to open source communities financially, as well as through code and through engagement, and to really talk about open source more broadly and promote open source. The driving motivation,often foran OSPO,starts withcompliance but then moves to engagement and moves to really very intentional structured processes and mechanisms around open source. Because that's the way, as Satchiko put it, you institutionalize practices around open source. You institutionalize open source. It's very important to have an organization thatwakes up in the morning and thinks about open source. This,in the last 10 years,has been very gratifying aswe continue to give back as we continue to engage, as we continue to work in open source. We have a long way to go, but I think it's been a gradual improvement and increase in how we work with open source. Thank you, Nithya. A few things there. I think we can also come back to, I'm sure, has to do with also this, that the demand came from your customers. I thought that's interesting. Also,of course,you mentioned this kind of maturity of engagement andhow that progresses. I think those are probably common themes for a lot of organizations. I'm European, so I think of all the panelists on the stage. I'm most familiar,actually,with the work thatyou've been doing in France Deanum Bastian but I think, and we talked about newly formed Ospus. You've been around for a little while, so you can talk a little bit more about having been established for a few years, but start from the beginning, and thank you, Bastian. Thank you, Sashiko. Thank you for having me. It's a real privilege. Free software is in the French public administration since 25 years. Big procurement has been active. Ministries know how to procure free software for a long time now. Then, eight years ago, we started to build this Blue Hats community that is the free software activist from ministries, public agencies WHO wants to share their enthusiasm about free software and open source in general, and wants to share skills. But it's only in 2021 thatwe started officially this Ospus,and the origin is because of the civil society. It's not just an idea that we had within the administration. We started to learn aboutprivate sector Ospus,got interested in that trying to understand what it was about, but it's only the civil society WHO told us, "You need to do that, " because there was a sense at the time thatthe department responsible for open data was all about open source, but it was like everyone is in charge, and no one is in charge. So the civil society told us, "You need to organize. You need to institutionalize this." And we did. It was aboutthree things aboutusing free software but also contributing to free software and producing new free software, that's what we do for the last few years. For example, this morning, we got docs, an alternative to Google Docs, registered within the DPGA,and that's the proof that we can put energy on producing new interesting free software, something that we do with our German friends. Use,contribute,and produce new free software payload to the needs of civil servants and we did this in three different ways for the legal aspects. Of course, compliance comes first. The technical aspects, because you need to prove that open source can be state of the arts when you address the civil servants needs. And also,people aspects,open source is aboutsharing,sharing the knowledge and building this community. And what the OSPO brought us is connections with other Ospos. That's key. Last year, Marcus Richter told something very interesting. He said, "No, OSPO is an island, and I would like to reiterate that thanks to the denium OSPO, we were able to build partnership with other ministries." So now we are stimulating a network of Ospos in different ministries. We were also able to build partnerships withoutside actors,foundations,for example the software heritage foundations, the Eclipse Foundation and others. And we are here to learn from other Ospos. We are very modest. We don't pretend that we are doing the right thing in everything we do, but we want to learn from other Ospos, and that's the key aspect of this institutionalization. Thank you Bastian, yes, my idea is that we give this sort of first an origin story, and then we'll talk aboutthe internal challenges and then also we'll be able to go back a little bit to focus on the external and collaborative aspects. But thank you very much, Avni, back to private sector OSPO. Thank you,all right,thank you,Satchiko,Omar,and the UN forinviting us here and hosting. So excited to be on the panel today and be with you all. So GitHub,while GitHub has always had open source activities andadvocates we formalized our OSPO after the Microsoft acquisition to mature our open source practices, right? And GitHub moved from having these ad hoc type activities to a structured program managing similar to what Bastian just said,really about inbound consumption of tens of thousands of open source packages, managing the release of GitHub's own open source packages. And then what I think is one of the, like, just the wonderfulness of open source, which is really the outreach to maintainers,external Ospos,and other organizations and really supporting the community and collaboration that we have. And our drivers for creating the OSPO were really, we want to, like, make sure that we're compliant with the legal obligations of the open source dependencies that we use. We want to enforce,like,security community anddigital best practices for the open source that we release and then serve as internal experts and connectors for open source for all levels of the organization, right? I think an organization that can live and breathe open source be a source of knowledge and wealth for, like, other developers and others in an organization really can, like, basically help the open source communities blossom worldwide and really encourage more international collaboration from,and I think just fromGitHub's perspective we want to follow the best practices that we espouse as the host of so many open source projects, right? From an EDU lens,one of the data thatwe see is that a lot of students are very interested in contributing to open source projects, but just don't know how to. And I think thatOspos can serve asthat bastion where people can come to -- no pun intended but wherepeople can come to andbe a hub whereit's like a fountain of knowledge for people just getting started in their developer journey. >> I can make the connection before between Bastion and Bastion, but now I'll see you, Bastion,in a different,you know,in a different light asa bastion of,you know OSPO expertise. I mean, it's great. You mentioned, actually, quite a few functions that an OSPO can have, and I think, again, going back to sort of what the audience said is thatthere is,you know you can be inspired but then also adapt to needs. And I think maybe not every OSPO will feel or have as their mandate to sort of have all these functions,but I guess it's a kind of -- andmaybe in some organizations you start having a focus on one function. This is what you also mentioned,Nithya,about sort of starting out withcompliance more legal compliance. And maybe,you know,this is a bit different fromif you come from the public sector potentially. The driving force might be different, but then there is all these -- all the things that can also happen as you mature as an organization using open source. So finally,you know,last butnot least,Richard Givers,I had to ask about the pronunciation. I don't know if it is a French,Bastia,how you would pronounce that,but I was into sort of, is that a French name? Then I would say something like Giver, or something like this, but it's Givers. Richard Givers, a newly formed OSPO in South Africa. Thanks. >> Thank you so much. And also, I just wanted to express my thanks for having us on the panel today. So in South Africa, we didn't start with an OSPO. We started with the crisis of trust, so the driving force, you mentioned, I think, was very different. The pandemic exposed a lot of deep gaps in our ability to provide services especially digital services, our ability to know WHO people were, validate WHO they were, be able to give them crucial social protection. And so coming out of that experience, our presidency alongside our digital ministry, DCT and national treasury created a digital transformation road map. I think it's the ninth one we've had in the last couple of years. But one that certainly reflects what is an emerging South Africa 2.0 under a government of national unity. Within the road map, we focused on creating a digital services unit that acts like an OSPO inside government and is coordinated by an departmental working group, which is a group of director generals that reports to an intimate ministerial committee. I'm new in the government space coming out of civil society myself, so there's a lot of words there. But it's quite interesting to be at this point of formation. We've done somuch in the last two years and in some ways we haven't done anything yet. And soI think what we're looking to do is form this modular civic-friendly DPR-focused OSPO that's had I not been on a part of the gathering last year maybe you wouldn't have understood as much as of how powerful the OSPO framing can be and the needs could be. So as a delivery unit inside the presidency, our main motivation is clearly to provide South Africans with services that can improve their livelihoods. So our motivations are sovereignty, trust and inclusion, which is a very interesting framing becauseit means thatin digital identity andpayments anddata exchange and the ability to provide trusted channels of government services our motivation very much is understanding how to leverage open modular principles and tools. And I know we have DPGs in the room, DPGA was mentioned and dial. So understanding how we africanize open products in a way that we are able to implement short-term delivery but also long-term sustainability in what we do. Our main andcore focus at the beginning of our journey is to provide that social protection to turn around our social protection ecosystem andmake sure thatpeople get pensions child grants,universal protection andunderstanding how we can leverage DPIs and especially open source TPI's as a delivery unit coordinates the development of these in governmental communities in order to provide the social protection butalso form linkages intothe economy economic development and jobs. And I think that's what's really interesting here,you know some of my fellow panelists the live, breathe, open source. I think we're in a culture and we'll get into it later in the panel where understanding how to hold this contested space is very interesting. Our job asa government OSPO is to be able to not fit one user perfectly but to be able to hold a contested space of people thatneed,have different needs in a common in a commons. And soa lot of the journey of the last two years has been a lot of consultation a lot of trying to hold those contested needs or those sort of differing needs in the space and design an OSPO that can deliver into that space. I think also just I believe not certainly not frompersonal background but from representation. I'm the only panelist that's global majority based. And so I think there's also an interesting space in this OSPO DPI space around stacks. Everyone's got their stack in your stack, your stack. What is the Africa stack? And I think a lot of what our unit is trying to understand is not to build another sort of intervention that tries to like build a kingdom. But how we can start to learn fromand certainly in the room and outside of the room incredible OSPO driven DPI interventions and the rest of the continent. And how we can start to take digital public goods and turn them and Africanize them. And I think like one of the most important things with that close is that we believe open source working in the openness, it can't be an afterthought. It has to be our foundation andsee that community across the continent has to be our foundation. And so where we go from there I think is going to be quite interesting. Thank you. Thank you, Richard. Thank you for bringing in the global majority. And also I think it's interesting for me how open source can also be part of this need for a government to be more transparent. And sothat's more like a part of an open government approach to increase trust for the government. I think that makes sense, more sense in some places than others. So I think it's more of a driving force. Interesting forme if somebody's been in open source andpolicy since 2007 is that nobody mentions cost saving. And I think that's a really interesting development on just how we have moved on I think when our conversations around open source it's more about,truly aboutinnovation transparency other issues. So I think that's really nice. I just want to have a question because I don't know if it's a lack of experience or the inability to learn from experience. I didn't bring any water. Also I don't have a clock. So I want to point me in the direction. Is there anywhere I thought maybe on the screen? Just want to make sure, okay, thank you, just so you know. We're good. Oh it's there. Thank you Said. It's my job and it's an important part of being able to fulfill that function. So that's good. We're going to move, as I said, towards focusing on this internal functioning of OSPO. And we're going to have another audience poll whichasked aboutchallenges that an organization might have in working with open source. And I think here maybe we can, oh, we can skip that, Eileen, thank you. No I think, but we can take that in the panel. So it's about sort of maybe talking first, I will start with this question to the sort of non-private sector. So academia and government talking a little bit about institutional challenges. What sort of,how do you navigate the particular institutional setup and were there some sort of critical decisions early on that allowed you to prevail in your mission? And I think we can also talk abouthere this notion of not just challenges but perceived challenges, which translates into a challenge anyway you have to overcome. So I don't know if you want to go in the same order,Said you can start talking about some challenges that you face, an overcome. I'll be happy to,and I'll focus on what might be an overarching challenge which I think will be common to OSPO's no matter the context,I'd be eager to hear from my panelists about this. And thatis culture is how do you change the culture of an institution toward the norms of open source, particularly collaboration? And I don't think anyone should be surprised thatwalking into a faculty member's office or senior administrator's office is saying hello I'm here to change the culture of the university is not a good idea. So it has to be done in a much more pervasive, systematic, continuous manner. And we talked aboutthe maturity stages of an OSPO andI think when I arrived at Carnegie Mellon,not surprisingly,it was the advocates,the champions of open source WHO immediately said this is wonderful, we have an OSPO, how can we work with you, how can we help you? But that's not enough. And I think what we've learned is we need to have an exponential growth of those champions and advocates. So while we started with that early wave of adopters WHO were very eager to work with us had projects already in place where they said are these right licenses or these right engineering practices and so on, governance models and so on, we now have them acting as ambassadors to other faculty students and administrators. And that's where the exponential effect is happening. So we now have faculty and students reaching out to us WHO we've never met, we've never spoken with. And I think that's an important inflection point. I'm always tempted to say how did you find out aboutme,but that seems a little strange. So I don't do that, I just launch into how can we help? And then they in turn will go and reach out to others. So that's been a really important challenge thatwe feel is essential as a foundational kind of bedrock type of challenge to address. And I just want to highlight Tom Hughes,WHO is the community manager for the OSPO team he has done a wonderful job of this and it wouldn't have been possible without his help. Thank you, Said. I think you can ask that question, but it's just, it's maybe how it's asked, right? How do you find me? And so maybe not, but you know, I think it's, yeah, I'm curious to know how did you learn about the work that we're doing? Great. Bastian, and then Richard. Yeah, so when we started the OSPO, my idea was that free software shouldn't depend too much on a few activists within the organization. And thathaving an OSPO would be,would let me go away in one year and let the organization continue its road. I failed, I'm still here, not for long, but that's one of the challenges. Like you depend on key people WHO know the ropes about free software and you have to pass that knowledge. So one challenge is to really focus on the community aspects of it. And one key thing thatwe did thatwas that we realized now is useful is this Blue Hats community because Blue Hats is in every ministry, it's not just DeNub. So whenDeNub questioned the utility of the OSPO when you had the whole Blue Hats community say, well, keep that in place, please, because we need this to get support, we need this to get someone organized webinars on open source and so on. So yeah,listens learned is build the community find the open source enthusiasts in every local public agency and tell them they are not so lonely that I think they are. Another challenge is to,because you are an administration there is the risk of creating something very bureaucratic that believes it can ask for more money just to continue to exist without any impact. So there is pressure so that you can prove you have some impact in terms of new software develop, new usage, economy, like how much money do you spare. But then if you try to do this,you forget aboutlong-term investment like maintenance like how do you have an exit strategy for the software you produce? And building those strategies requires long-term view. So you find yourself always trying to find the right trade-offs between short-term impact and visibility of what you do so that people you give you money continue to nurture your efforts. And this long-term view of how do you invest in civil servants? How do you invest in the private companies that produce this great open source software that you are using? How do you also invest in those strategies that makes, that goes from a free software that is just some repository somewhere,two engagement witha community that is sustainable? So OSPO is very bureaucratic,it's an institution,it's made so that it can survive people WHO built it and it's good. But we can use it becauseit's free software,we can use it andwe should use it as a way to de-brokrotize, to fight bureaucracy. Not in some stupid way,but in some very human way andvery with a long-term view of what we're doing for the public good. Thank you, Bastianne, we heard about culture and community and I think it's interesting how that's not in opposition to institutionalizing things but in fact having the institution to support a sustained,how can I say sustained effort to grow a new culture or to build community. So the institution sort of enables that, I think that's quite interesting because we sometimes think thateither there's the culture community or there are institutions but in fact the institution is there with an intent to build and support a change of culture. Richard,you're at the start of the process,so what are you thinking about those things? Thank you, Sticker. I think Said and Bastianne took all my talking points, which is perfect. That happens, but losing control. But also validation and it's nice when someone else does the work for you. I think culture in government globally is a challenge and South Africa is no different to that. So there is a lot of fear around losing control, actually. There's a lot of fear of taking on risk in eating policy, Jennifer Poco wrote a very good blog on why it's so comfortable for government to do project thinking instead of product thinking. And to the points of open source andI suppose why it's better to have someone else some vendor outside build something for you and deliver it's early outside of you. And a lot of it has to do withthe way thatwe measure costs the time frames we measure cost in, non-economic costs that we don't take into account and risk. And soin the current way thatwe exist in South Africa we aren't good like many governments or understand how to procure open source, work with open source, think in a product mindset and we're happy to accept the exponential costs of modernizing platforms every five years or whatever it is, however it happens. And I think there's also a sense of within government not wanting to make mistakes. We don't understand very well how to be proactive in a conversation andopen sothat whenwe make mistakes, we make them in the open and together. And soI think a lot of the ways we're looking at dealing withthis and to say we've started at this level recently is true but to say that it's not true that they haven't been in very intensive and significant projects and products that have been in incorporated national governments in open source from open source community over the last five years and a lot of momentum that's being collated by our team. And I think a lot of it comes down to value exchange. So not expecting,so doing the work for public servants to be able to understand what their incentives are andunderstanding how to map the outcomes to the things that motivate people. I don't think anyone should have to be put in a, you know, any civil servants should have to put in a place where their job is on the line because they're taking a risk on open source. I think asan open source community andas teams like myself we need to build an understanding of what value they need, what they need to be able to feel comfortable to adopt open product thinking, those sorts of things. I think also it's abouttaking,you know,using prototypes andareas that are less contentious to show new ways of doing things. And part of my experience has been doing thatover the last 10 years,I think and bringing that into government is going to be important. And then I think principles andvalues,you know we have been incorporating the DPI safeguards from the UN into our work. I think flagging alignment with African union and fill out African partners, global, you know, ecosystems like the UN on open source principles, giving a lot of steering that these things are possible and done and not just done in global minority communities, but that there is a way that we can start to build capability within our context. I think just to finish,a lot of the challenge that we face is we're not knowledgeable buyers of technology necessarily,and this might be a common thing for governments everywhere. And so we get very excited about the tech, and I don't really ascribe to the commonly said thing that it's not about the tech because I think it is about the technology. But I think it's about the way that the culture around the technology exists. And if we're going to meaningfully africanize andbuild a community that can contribute and support to DPGs and other open source systems, that has to be a very intentional intervention that's supported with skills and mentoring and building opportunities for communities to develop, I think that governance has to be looked at. So we have this in our roadmap. We have this house, consultants love houses that sort of build up to a vision. And on the left,there's all of the digital identity andwallets and that's what everyone's excited about. But actually, I think what's going to be a make or break for us in the public sector as per environment is the right-hand side of it, which is governance, our ability to work across government,our ability to build capability locally that starts to bring tech jobs back into the country after many years of sending them out, and also working with non-governmental communities and understanding how much we can actually adopt if we get our mechanisms right. Thank you, Richard. Also mentioning, of course, the pre-OSPO journey, which I think there probably should be some kind of collaboration around that as well. I can foresee that an outcome of this could be sort of those governments or those representatives WHO are considering or are close to it. That's also an interesting network that we can support, I think. How do you get to the OSPO that stage? Bastia already mentioned this need to show that you have an impact, and I think that that's important in any organization, but I guess, especially in the private sector, it's not enough to say that you're doing something for the greater good. How do you make sure that you align those pressures that you have to show that you're creating value forAmazon withthe broader goals of innovation andpublic good et cetera. Yeah, please. Thank you, Sachiko. I think it's so important for an OSPO to not live in isolation, but to be very aligned with the goals of the organization andto also understand the role that open source plays in the organization and how to support that role. For Amazon, for example, customers, we are customer-obsessed. We care deeply about what our customers want. So aligning with customer requirements for open source, engagement with open source, managed open source services, et cetera, is so important. So that was one of the drivers that we wanted to align with. The second is our developers across the company are innovating really fast on behalf of customers and they use a lot of open source. So we needed to acknowledge the fact that open source was important to our innovation journey androadmap,and thatwe need to remove a lot of the friction in use and contribution and release of open source across the company. So making our developers or builders successful was an extremely important thing. The third thing was the fact thatwe live in a global world and we live in a world that is using open source in very strategic ways,and we wanted to be part of that community. We wanted to support sustaining open source across the world moving open source forward contributing back to open source. It's not only a selfish goal,it's a business continuity goal,for example but it's also a goal of being a connected organization with the world at large. And, you know, as Said mentioned, culture and language, there is a culture always in a company or an organization,and there's an open source culture which is very different. So I often think of myself and the OSPO as a bridge builder, building bridges from the internal OSPO language and the Amazon language to the language of the open source community and translating back and forth. And speaking in the Amazon business language is the way to show impact is to demonstrate that we are making a bottom line impact we are moving the needle in terms of the speed of innovation, we are moving the needle in terms of how customers perceive us and our open source solutions. So we have to demonstrate our business impact in the language of the organization. So that's how we've been working on it. Yeah. And that needs to be adapted again, so, you know, I just want to, yeah, Abni? Thanks, San Chico. I think due to GitHub's role in, the OSPO's role in managing our inbound consumption of open source, I think similar to what Nithya was just saying about innovation, right? We're hyper aware by looking at what our developers are using we're hyper aware of new technologies platforms,and languages encountered as teams on board to new open source dependencies. And we often get a first look, right? So I think whenyou think of business impact I think one thing we are is an early indicator or providing a provider of signals asto what direction is technology going where is innovation heading? And it's a transparent way for,you know,institutions to understand where our developers moving to, very early on, right? So, and I think one of the ways that OSPO's can help build support is by, like, helping solve problems andcoming up withsolutions or alternatives and not just being the group that says no, right? Or like, hey, you can't use this, can't, you know, don't use that. But really,like thinking of creative solutions to finding pathways to support developers within community. When we think of, like, impact beyond the company, right, I think GitHub, specifically, like,I think one of the things that you hear on this panel is the diversity among OSPO's right? There's no one-size-fits-all, and in that poll that was put up at the beginning, I think one of the options was, like, how important context is. And I saw a lot of people selected that, I think, almost 20%. Selected, like, context is so important when you're thinking about, like, setting up an OSPO. And I felt, like, like, like, each one of us, like, has our own challenges. And while, like, we share, there are many similarities, right, and I think you can learn from any, I think there's also, they often have different focuses, whether, like, we've talked abouthere,like,consumption,creation,or,actually,the community and collaboration aspect. And whenI think,like,for GitHub,the GitHub OSPO does some amazing work like supporting the GitHub secure open source fund throughour sponsors program and also maintainer month to support, like, open source maintainers and allowing people to learn from each other, regardless of what type of OSPO or what type of open source organization you come from. That's also the home of the majority of the digital public goods. And we partner withthe DPG Alliance to improve,like community management of open source for good, from capacity building to project discoverability. So we're looking to learn fromeach cohort and looking always to improve the work we do. Thank you. So we're going to move on to the,sort of external global collaboration aspect or potential of Ospos. And we're going to speed up a little bit here because we want to have a chance also to bring in some questions from the floor. So I'm going to ask each one of you just to,sort of give an example of cross border or cross-sector collaboration, just to, sort of, give an example of that scene. Well I will choose the UN hackathons. So the OSPO at Carnegie Mellon is, in fact, based in Pittsburgh. But we have two global campuses. One campus, CMU, Carnegie Mellon, Africa, in Kigali, Rwanda. And one in Doha, Qatar, Carnegie Mellon, Qatar campus. We just,earlier this month,hosted a hackathon with the UN in the reboot the Earth series. And it included,not only students andparticipants fromCarnegie Mellon,Africa but also from an African network called the Upansi network. So we had many participants from the global majority. And we are also planning an additional reboot the Earth hackathon at CMU's campus in Qatar later this year. One thing I will say is, we need different messages for different audiences in terms of how the value and importance of collaboration. And sometimes I found thatit's actually important to say,don't think aboutit as collaboration. Think of it as your self-interest aligning with someone else's self-interest. And what I love about these UN hackathons, as we saw in the video, is that everybody there,at least one of their self-interest is trying to make the world a better place. So you can get a lot of energy andenthusiasm fromuniversities and all of us to participate in these hackathons. Really good point. I think the energy in the room, it shows also, I mean, something I often talk about, is this need. We talk about the skills gap, et cetera. We had that LinkedIn, you know, side event yesterday, and it was talking about the skills gap. How do we attract more people into contributing? And one thing that really works is to not just talk about technology, but to talk about technology forsomething,then you attract a wider audience andmore excitement I think as well. So that's a really good point. Thank you. I think you said it well, connecting it to the problem that you're solving, right? One of the big roles the hospital plays is to be a connecting hub connecting people inside the company, but also connecting organizations outside to the inside. So very often we get questions from people around the world WHO say, WHO should I work with within Amazon on this particular issue whether it is sustainability or energy or film industry, et cetera. And so we are able to then track down WHO's doing open source work across the company and connect them to that work. But the other connection withthe outside world that I particularly love is a group called todogroup.org. And thatis an organization of Ospos,frankly,both private sector Ospos but also public sector, universities, very similar to what you're doing in Saeed, and it allows us to learn from each other because we all don't know everything and it allows us to problem solve together, which is the essence of open source, which is global collaboration. How do we break down a problem together rather than duplicate our work across multiple problems? So those are some of the areas thatI feel we connect withthe outside world and the global world. Thank you. Yeah, one example, I know you're doing many things, but two is one. One is the collaboration with Software Heritage. So we have five millions of civil servants,we have many developers,teachers researchers. Where do they contribute? What software do they contribute to? And we could find out only by,we have many platforms,GitLab,GitHub many repositories but we could only find these figures by going to this platform agnostic project that gather all the source code. And that's a collaboration becausesoftware is not just software it's also data if you want insight aboutwhat your civil servants are doing then you need to go to this universal archive. And the second example is Docs withthe German friends,again,Zendes and Sarvak De Genci which is that's an example of a product thatsuddenly fits many needs and we are excited about making it sustainable. Thanks, question. I do think like for,I want to give one example of GitHub where we've been collaborating with the World Health Organization since 2020, both in helping strengthen the WHO's in our source software development processes aswell as supporting the creation of their OSPO. And one thing like we realized is like they had over a hundred open source or they have over a hundred open source repositories by different groups and one of their mandates is making sure their open source ecosystem is safe, reliable, well maintained. And to ensure that they meet this mandate, they needed like a measurable way to check what like what was going on and really in an automated fashion. So we helped develop the open source metrics dashboard,which is open source and available allowing them to see like license compliance,but also like issues,discussions and then also like SLA, like how long does it take to respond to an issue? And this is available for any open source project to use or open source organization to use,really helping with some of the overhead that's involved in maintaining a large number of open source repos. Thank you. Richard. Yeah. So I think from the start of this journey, we've had a lot of collaboration from India Brazil in their G20 journeys and DPI journeys in terms of how they did its guidance on lessons learned from things like ad hire and picks and others. So I think that there's a very good strong south to south collaboration going there. And then just to put a shout out to how useful the safeguards have been the UN safeguards and DPI have been in our process andhow those in a political process and a broader community process as you're setting up your terms of collaboration or finding each other self-interests how they can act asa steer to values andmake sure that when there is a lot of different players to try and balance needs for, there is this common set of values that you can align on. So I think just two examples of one,obviously,drawing fromthis global ecosystem and then secondly,from very gracious andopen learning fromIndian Brazil andothers but particularly those on our journey over the last two years. Thank you, Richard. So you brought in again the global south andcollaborating with newly formed ospos across the global south. And also,of course,we heard fromthe French OSPO,but Omar asked me also this week introduced me to tell me about this new OSPO that's formed in Trinidad and Tobago. And I had the opportunity to meet with Craig Lamlal. This yesterday? Yes, you're there. I was scanning the room, you know, feeling a loss of control. But for those of you WHO were at the side event yesterday, you heard from Craig. Craig is a former member of the high-level advisory board, the UN high-level advisory board on AI and so you could hear his input on the report that Odette and ILO has put out. And you are also one of the leads of the Trinidad and Tobago OSPO and the executive director of the AI Innovation Center. If you just could share a little bit about your journey and where you're at with the formation of the Trinidad and Tobago OSPO, that would be great. Yes. Thank you very much. I actually wrote a speech. Oh, great. You have two minutes. Sorry. I'll be quick. Ask Eileen. Okay. All right. Okay. So thank you for the floor and thank you for this remarkable panel. And as we have heard already, the OSPO's model has evolved into a powerful force, not just in the private sector, but increasingly across public institutions and academia. It reflects a shift in how we think about innovation, collaboration, and sovereignty in the digital age. Of course, you know I'm big on sovereignty. Today I am proud to share alongside my colleagues and with the valued financial support of the European Commission not only the establishment of an OSPO in the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago, but also one in the Republic of Kenya. These are not isolated initiatives but backed by the leadership of the United Nations Development Program and the International Telecommunications Union. And our aim is very, very ambitious. It is to create a replicable scalable model toward a global network of OSPO's across the global south,joining andlearning fromthe early adopters andthose WHO are already paving the way as we saw heard from this remarkable panel. Our Trinidad andTobago's and Kenya's OSPO's are particularly unique in the way they are designed to serve the entire country beyond the government. Through collaborative,supportive,and service to our national ministries,as well as active leadership outside of the government by institutions such asmy own university these OSPO's are designed to amplify capacity of our local tech communities throughadoption and promotion of open source. We believe responsible, fast citizenship, and stewardship efforts by these countries, governments are a key component of a modern day economic workforce development. To all of you gathered here today I invite you to join us after this upcoming break in Conference Room 9. We will be hosting an open andengaging discussion withour OSPO teams and we are eager to share this to learn andto build together withthe broader open source community and the many OSPO's WHO have come before us. Let's help ensure that this global effort becomes a transformative one. Thank you very much. Thank you, Craig. So not just Trinidad and Tobago, but also Kenya, and I think the expectation, the hope is that when we come back next year, yes, we're coming back next year, that we'll hear about more examples of newly formed OSPO's or OSPO's in the planning. So we have time,I think,for one or two questions fromthe floor,and just wanted to again go back to just the sort of,we had thatoriginal question to the audience,it's about sort of how we can learn, but also how we have to adapt to local context, et cetera. So maybe that's an inspiration for a question. I have received a message, yes, you have to press the button if you want to speak. So WHO wants to speak? I saw over there, yes, you have the floor. Hello everyone, good afternoon, I'm so glad to be here. My name is Fatima Biola Jimobi, and I'm representing a local NGO from Nigeria that is focused on education andtechnology,especially forthe visually and the hearing impaired. One major question that I would like to ask is, what is the scalability of open source when it comes to the global south, especially in Nigeria and other African countries? What are our collaborative opportunities, and are there any funding opportunities for small local NGOs on how we can either participate or have our own hospitals moving ahead? Also, how we're able to reconcile DPIs and our systems and cultures of government in the global south? That's all in a nutshell. Yeah, a few questions. I think, you know, choose one question, and if you wanted to, is anybody want to ask the answer? Two questions also about the global south. I mean,I think thatI really appreciate the sustainability question because I don't think with any prejudice,the open source archetype is definitely one that people understand in a global minority context. And as someone WHO comes from African open source community, I think it is definitely sustainable but I think it has to be a completely different paradigm in terms of how we set up teams, how we build organizations. We just, at the moment, mostly in the context of where we develop from, don't have the ability to do the sort of open source dream, hobbyist sort of contribution community. And so I think a lot of it, what we do have the real big opportunity in is that we have to be sustainable very fast. There's less safety nets, there's less support. And sowhere those succeed,they succeed well,and I hope that what we can start to do is shine those lights brighter and so that more funding is flowing to that. And it speaks to what I mean what I was saying earlier around the short term versus long term thinking,because short term,if I as a government's delivering coordination unit want to meet my very pressing needs my best thing to do is to get some international donor to fund a team and some other continent to deliver something for us. And then in the whole context of open source andDPI andsovereignty we really just replaced it, one vendor for another. And so a lot of the conversation is how we both look to short term needs, but develop capabilities and communities locally. And the choices we make in terms of what, in terms of an aspect, in terms of what we engage with and what we invest in is really critical. And those sorts of frameworks is where we need support from a global community. When we make a choice around X-road,you know,or open wallets or most support what does that really mean? And how do we make sure that we're not essentially in five years' time in the same position where we've lost our control of our core stack? Nithyan and Bastian, yes? Quick thought, open source really is founded on volunteerism. And so you have a lot of mentors in this room WHO are volunteers and WHO can be invited to come start a community in your nation, in your organization. And the hackathon model is a great model because in a short period of time, you can have mentors teach a community and hand them the tools to continue and sustain that. One other element I will mention is organizations like the Python Foundation have things like PiLadies andother smaller communities thatare hyper-local andWHO get together and teach each other and grow from there and are still connected to the bigger community. So I would look at some of those ways of growing awareness andstrength and competency. Use great advice and use the weak here to make the connections, Bastian? One of the first freedom you get with free software is the freedom to adapt the software to the local needs andone of the first needs is localization translation in your own language. For example, 17 years ago, I was working for the one laptop per child project, I was in high tea and we had to localize the operating system, it was a challenge. We were having a problem with one word and I told my co-workers, Asian students, let's check on the high Cien quail Wikipedia,they love at me,they say,"Well that's something you think. You in France that we have Wikipedia for every country, every language, let's check." And there was a high Cien quail Wikipedia thatthey didn't even know about this Wikipedia and it was a new world. We could get help from the local Wikimedia community to translate this free software. So I don't know aboutscalability becausethat's aboutbusiness models there are volunteers but they are not just volunteers,there are also companies and there is a concern about long-term maintenance for free software in general and we should put effort on that. But every free software is adaptable to your local needs and that's very key. Hi Fatima, thanks for your questions. I think you also asked aboutfunding forsmall hospitals and I do think what the panel discussed earlier may help whichis talking abouttechnology forX,like technology for a specific purpose and figuring out how you can think about your potential donors or your potential funding sources,what are they interested in,what are their goals and how do they align or agree with the goals of the hospital thatyou're forming,right,they can do that may be helpful. Thank you andI,you know,the funding landscape is,you know,everybody,you know it's always asking aboutthe funding butI mean my experience at least in Europe and I think we heard that you know thatTrinidad andTobago has received some support from the European Commission funding and my impression is also that funders increasingly are looking to favor open source projects and open source solutions so I think it's something that is resonating more generally with funders so yes. We are going to wrap up this panel and I'm going to ask each panelist just to give a sort of final piece of advice for anybody out there considering, you know, considering an hospital is on that journey so one sentence or close to it, closing. You're not alone, seek out the resources and networks that have been described here and we're happy to have you join our effort. I would say the founding team of an OSPO is so important having people with experience in open source and WHO can translate back and forth between your organization and open source is important and then mentor the next generation. Everyone these days is aboutsovereignty andI think OSPO's public sector OSPO shouldn't be swallowed up by sovereignty. We should find a balance between sovereignty and freedom and also we started with some friends to build the list of public sector OSPO's so if you have an OSPO in a government in a local municipality like please join us andwe will try to connect with each other. I would say don't forget aboutdocumentation andtraining as you build up your OSPO because that is one way to essentially share andbroaden your network and then I think in this increasingly virtual world I love these in-person connections sothe hackathons and the in-person events will really help you build the bridges fromyour OSPO to the work that you're trying to do and the impact that you're trying to have. Yeah those are brilliant. I think our biggest principle is design fortrust and to steal the words of Richard Pope from platform land, design the seams, don't go for seamless design but design the seams, show people how and where it comes from and then you'll get them to follow you. Thank you, nice final words. Thank you andthank you to the panelists please a round of applause or almost on time.
